<footnote><para>
Приводя настоящ&#1110;й перечень для облегчен&#1110;я ссылокъ, 
д&#1123;лаемыхъ въ текст&#1123;, мы ограничиваемся спец&#1110;альной 
орнитологической литературой и вовсе не касаемся другихъ, упоминаемыхъ въ 
первой глав&#1123;, изсл&#1123;дован&#1110;й, равно какъ и 
сочинен&#1110;й бол&#1123;е раннихъ авторовъ.
</para></footnote>

<orderedlist>
<listitem><para><emphasis>Beddard</emphasis>. The Structure and Classification of Birds. London, 1898.</para></listitem>

<listitem><para><emphasis>Bronn's</emphasis>. Klassen und Ordnungen des Tierreichs. V&#0246;gel. I. Anatomischer Teil von Selenka und Gadow. Leipzig, 1891.</para></listitem>

<listitem><para><emphasis>Forbes</emphasis>. Note on the Structure of the Palate in the Trogons (Trogonidae). Proc. Zool. Soc. 1881.</para></listitem>

<listitem><para><emphasis>Forbes</emphasis>. On some points in the Anatomy of the Todies (Todidae) and of the affinities of that Group. P. Z. S. 1882.</para></listitem>

<listitem><para><emphasis>F&#0252;rbringer</emphasis>. Untersuchungen zur Morphologie und Systematik der V&#0246;gel. Jena und Amsterdam. 1888.</para></listitem>

<listitem><para><emphasis>Gadow</emphasis>. Systematischer Teil in Bronns Klassen u. Ordnungen. Leipzig, 1893.</para></listitem>

<listitem><para><emphasis>Garrod</emphasis>. Notes on the Anatomy of the Colies (Colius). Proc. Zool. Soc. 1876.</para></listitem>

<listitem><para><emphasis>Garrod</emphasis>.  Notes on the Anatomy and Systematic position of the genera Thinocorus and Attagis, P. Z. S.</para></listitem>

<listitem><para><emphasis>Garrod</emphasis>.  Notes on the Anatomy of Indicator major. Proc. Zool. Soc. 1878.</para></listitem>

<listitem><para><emphasis>Magnus</emphasis>. Untersuchungen &#0252;ber die Structur der kn&#0246;chernen Vogelkopfes. Zeitschr. f. wies. Zool. XXI, 1870.</para></listitem>

<listitem><para><emphasis>Menzbier</emphasis>. Vergleichende Osteologie der Pinguine in Anwendung zur Haupteinteilung der V&#0246;gel. Bull. Soc. Natur, de Moscou, 1887.</para></listitem>

<listitem><para><emphasis>Newton</emphasis>. Dictionary of Birds. London, 1893&mdash;96.</para></listitem>

<listitem><para><emphasis>Parker, W. K.</emphasis> On the Osteology of Gallinaceous Birds and Tinamous. Trans. Zool. Soc. Vol. V part III, 1862.</para></listitem>

<listitem><para><emphasis>Parker, W. K.</emphasis> On the Structure and Development of the Skull in the Ostrich Tribe. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. 1865.</para></listitem>

<listitem><para><emphasis>Parker, W. K.</emphasis> On the Structure and Development of the Skull of the Common Fowl. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. 1866.</para></listitem>

<listitem><para><emphasis>Parker, W. K.</emphasis> On the Structure and Development of the Crow's Skull. Monthly Micr. Journ. 1872.</para></listitem>

<listitem><para><emphasis>Parker, W. K.</emphasis> On the Development of the Skull in the Genus Turdus &mdash; the Thrushes. Monthly Micr. Journ. 1875.</para></listitem>

<listitem><para><emphasis>Parker, W. K.</emphasis> On the Development of the Skull in the Tit and Sparrow-IIawk. Monthly Micr. Journ. 1873.</para></listitem>

<listitem><para><emphasis>Parker, W. K.</emphasis> On the Morphology of the Skull in the Woodpeckers und Wrynecks. Trans. Lin. Soc. II ser. 1874.</para></listitem>

<listitem><para><emphasis>Parker, W. K.</emphasis> On the Osteology of the Kagu (Rhynochetus jubatus). Trans. Zool. Soc. 1878.</para></listitem>

<listitem><para><emphasis>Parker, W. K.</emphasis> On the Structure and Development of the Birds Skull. Trans. Linn. Soc. II ser. Zool. vol. I, part 5, 1876.</para></listitem>

<listitem><para><emphasis>Parker, W. K.</emphasis> On Aegithognathous Birds (Part. I). Trans. Zool. Soc. Vol. IX, part V. 1875 and <quote>On the Skull of the Aegithognathous Birds</quote> (Part II). Vol. X, part VI, 1878.</para></listitem>

<listitem><para><emphasis>Parker, W. K.</emphasis> On the Morphology of the Duck and the Auk Tribes. Royal Irish Academy. Cunningham Memoirs, 1890.</para></listitem>

<listitem><para><emphasis>Parker, W. K.</emphasis> and <emphasis>Bettany</emphasis>. Morphology of the Skull. 1877.</para></listitem>

<listitem><para><emphasis>Pycraft</emphasis>. Contributions to the Osteology of Birds. P. Z. S. 1898.</para></listitem>

<listitem><para><emphasis>Pycraft</emphasis>. On the Morphology and Phylogeny of the Palaeognathae (Ratitae and Crypturi) and Neognathae (Carinatae). Trans. Zool. Soc. 1900.</para></listitem>

<listitem><para><emphasis>Pycraft</emphasis>. Some Points in the Morphology of the Palate of the Neognathae. Journ. Linn. Soc. Zoology. Vol. XXVIII, 1901.</para></listitem>

<listitem><para><emphasis>Pycraft</emphasis>. A Contribution towards our Knowledge of the Morphology of the Owls. Part II. Osteology. T. L. S. 2 ser. Zool. Vol. IX. Part I, 1903.</para></listitem>

<listitem><para><emphasis>Shuffe1dt</emphasis>. Some Comparative Osteological Notes on the North American Kites. Ibis. 6 ser., vol. III, 1891.</para></listitem>

<listitem><para><emphasis>Shuffe1dt</emphasis>. Contribution to the Comparative Osteology of the Trochilidae, Caprimulgidae and Cypselidae. P. Z. S. 1885.</para></listitem>

<listitem><para><emphasis>Сушкинъ</emphasis>. Zur Morphologie des Vogelskeletts. I. Sch&#0228;del von Tinnunculus. Mem. Soc. Imp. des Natur, de Moscou, 1899.</para></listitem>

<listitem><para><emphasis>Сушкинъ</emphasis>. Сравнительная остеолог&#1110;я дневныхъ хищныхъ птицъ и вопросы классификац&#1110;и. 1902.</para></listitem>
</orderedlist>
&liniya;
