<sect2><title>Титульная страница</title>
<para><literallayout>


Infant Chimpanzee and Human Child
















</literallayout></para>
</sect2>

<?page-break?>
<sect2><title>Оборот титульной страницы</title>
<para><literallayout>


SERIES IN AFFECTIVE SCIENCE CLASSICS

Series Editors
Richard J. Davidson
Paul Ekman
Klaus Scherer


Infant Chimpanzee and Human Child: A Classic 1935
Comparative Study of Ape Emotions and Intelligence
By N. N. Ladygina-Kohts
Edited by Frans B. M. de Wall















</literallayout></para>
</sect2>

<?page-break?>
<sect2><title>Вторая титульная страница</title>
<para><literallayout>


INFANT
CHIMPANZEE
and
HUMAN CHILD

                 A Classic 1935
                 Comparative
                 Study of Ape
                 Emotions and
                 Intelligence


				 
				 
				 
N. N. LADYGINA-KOHTS

Edited by Frans B. M. de Waal
Translated by Boris Vekker
Introduction by Allen and Beatrix Gardner
The publication of this volume was sponsored by
Living Links, Yerkes Regional Research Center at Emory University.






OXFORD
University Press

2002
</literallayout></para>
</sect2>

<?page-break?>
<sect2><title>Оборот второй титульной страницы</title>
<para><literallayout>

Copyright 2002 by Oxford University Press, Inc.

This volume was originally published in 1935, by the Museum Darwinianum,
as Volume III in their series, Scientific Memoirs of the
Museum Darwinianum

Published by Oxford University Press, Inc.
198 Madison Avenu, New York, New York 10016

Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press.

All right reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
eletronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
withouth the prior permission of Oxford University Press.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Ladygina-Kohts, N. N. (Nadezhda Nikolaevna), 1890-1963.
Infant chimpanzee and human child: a classic 1935 comparative study of
ape emotions and intelligence / N. N. Ladygina-Kohts ; translated by Boris Vekker ;
edited by Frans B. M. de Wall.
p. cm. &mdash; (Series in affective science)
<quote>The publication of this volume was sponsored by Living Links,
Yerkes Regional Primate Research Center at Emory University.</quote>
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-19-513565-2
1. Chimpanzees&mdash;Psychology.  2. Animal intelligence.  3. Behavioral assessment of
children.  4. Child development&mdash;Testing.  I Waal, F. B. M. de (Frans B. M.), 1948&mdash;
II. Title.  III Series.
QL785 .L28  2000
599.885&#180;139&mdash;dc21    00-028546



1 3 5 7 9 8 6 4 2
Printed in the United States of America
on acid-free paper
</literallayout></para>
</sect2>
