<simplelist>
<member><emphasis role="bold">Bierens de Haan.</emphasis> Experiments on vision in monkeys. Biologisches Zentralblatt, Jahrgang 45. 1925.</member>
<member><emphasis role="bold">Bytendjik F. J. J.</emphasis> Considerations de psychologie compar&#0233;e &#0224; propos d'experiences faites avec le singe Cercopithecus. Arch. n&#0233;erl. physiol. 1918 v. 3 </member>
<member><emphasis role="bold">K. Drescher und Trendelenburg</emphasis> Weiterer Beitrag zur Intelligenzpr&#0252;fung an Affen (einschliesslich Anthropoiden). Zeitschrift f&#0252;r vergleichende Physiologie. 5 Band, 3 Heft. 1927.</member>
<member><emphasis role="bold">Garner.</emphasis> Apes and monkeys; their life and language. Boston &amp; London, 1900.</member>
<member><emphasis role="bold">Haggerty, M. E.</emphasis> A study of imitation in monkeys. Journal comp. Neurol. and Psychology. 1919. vol. 19</member>
<member><emphasis role="bold">Hamilton, G. V.</emphasis> A study of trial and error reactions in Mammals. Journ. Animal Behaviour 1911, vol. 1.</member>
<member><emphasis role="bold">Hamilton, G. V.</emphasis> A study of perseverance reactions in Primates and Rodents. Beh. Monogr, vol. 3. IX. 2. 1916.</member>
<member><emphasis role="bold">Hicks, V. C.</emphasis> The relative values of different curves of learning. Journ. Anim. Behaviour I. 1911.</member>
<member>*)<emphasis role="bold">Hobhouse, L. T.</emphasis> Mind in Evolution. 2nd ed. London 1915.</member>
<member><emphasis role="bold">Hoge, M. A. and Stocking, B. J.</emphasis> 1912. A note on the relative value of punishment and reward as motives. Journ. Anim Behav. 2. 43</member>
<member><emphasis role="bold">Hunter, W. S.</emphasis> 1913. The delayed reaction in animals and children: Beh. Monographs 2 № 1. Ser. 6.</member>
<member>*)<emphasis role="bold">Kinnaman, A. J.</emphasis> Mental life of two Macacus rhesus monkeys in captivity. Am. Journ. Psych. 1902, vol. 13.</member>
<member><emphasis role="bold">K&#0246;hler W.</emphasis> Die Methoden der psychologischen Forschungen an Affen. Abderhalderus Handbuch der biologischen Arbeitsmethoden. Heft I.</member>
<member><emphasis role="bold">Nellmann und Trendelenburg, W.</emphasis> Ein Beitrag zur Inteligenzpr&#0252;fung niederer Affen. Zeitschrift f. vergl. Physiologie, 4. 1926.</member>
<member><emphasis role="bold">Pfungst, O.</emphasis> Zur Psychologie der Affen Verhdlgn. 5 Kongr. f. Psychologie, 1912.</member>
<member><emphasis role="bold">R&#0232;v&#0233;sz G.</emphasis> Exp&#0233;rience sur la m&#0233;moire topographique et sur la d&#0233;couverte d'uu systeme chez les enfants et des singes inf&#0233;rieures Extraits des Archives de Psychologie. T. XVIII. № 72. Mai 1923.</member>
<member><emphasis role="bold">R&#0232;v&#0233;sz G.</emphasis> Experimenal study in abstraction in Monkeys. Journ. Compar. Psychologie vol. V. № 4. 1925.</member>
<member><emphasis role="bold">Shepherd, W. T.</emphasis> Some mental process of the Rhesus monkey. Psychol. Rev. Monogr. Suppl. 12. 1910.</member>
<member><emphasis role="bold">Shepherd, W. T.</emphasis> Tests on adaptive intelligence in dogs and cats compared with adaptive intelligence in Rhesus monkeys. &#8212; Amer. Journal Psychol. 1915. Vol. 26.</member>
<member>*)<emphasis role="bold">Thorndike, E. L.</emphasis> Animal Intelligence. Psych. Rev. Monogr. Suppl., vol. 2. № 4. 1898.</member>
<member>*)<emphasis role="bold">Thorndike, E. L.</emphasis> The mental life of monkeys. Psych. Rev. Monogr. Suppl. 15. 1912.</member>
<member><emphasis role="bold">Tinklepaugh, O. L.</emphasis> An experimental study of representative factors in monkeys. Journal of Comp. Psychology, vol. VIII, № 3, June, 1928.</member>
<member><emphasis role="bold">Washburn, M. F.</emphasis> The animal mind. New York, 1908.</member>
<member><emphasis role="bold">Washburn, M. F.</emphasis> Some experiments bearing upon color vision in monkeys. Journal of comparative Neurology and Psychology.</member>
<member><emphasis role="bold">Watson B.</emphasis> Imitation in monkeys. Psychological Bull. 1908, vol. 5. № 6.</member>
<member><emphasis role="bold">Witmer L.</emphasis> A monkey with a mind. Psychological Clinic. 3. 179&#8212;205. 1909.</member>
<member><emphasis role="bold">Witmer L.</emphasis> Intelligent imitation and curiosity in a monkey. Psych. Clin. 3. 225&#8212;227</member>
<member>*)<emphasis role="bold">Yerkes, R. M.</emphasis> The mental Life of Monkeys and Apes. A Study of ideational behaviour. Behav. Monogr. 1916. 3. № 1.</member>
<member><emphasis role="bold">Yerkes, R. M.</emphasis> Provision for the sutdy of the monkeys and apes. Science 1916. № 43. P. 231&#8212;234.</member>
<member><emphasis role="bold">Ziegler, H. E.</emphasis> Die geistigen F&#0228;higkeiten der Affen. Heft 3. 1922.</member>
</simplelist>
