<formalpara id="eng_photo1">
  <title>Table <quote>The Macaque <quote>Dasy</quote> at quiet.</quote></title>
  <xref linkend="photo1" /><?br?>
<?br?>
</formalpara>

<formalpara id="eng_photo2">
  <title>Table <quote>The Macaque threatened and on the lookout.</quote></title>
  <xref linkend="photo2" /><?br?>
Fig. 1. The Macaque in a threatening posture.<?br?>
Fig. 2. The Macaque on the lookout.<?br?>
</formalpara>

<formalpara id="eng_photo3">
  <title>Table <quote>Preparation for experiments</quote></title>
  <xref linkend="photo3" /><?br?>
Fig. 1. Framework introduced into cage.<?br?>
Fig. 2. Food introduced into cage.<?br?>
</formalpara>

<formalpara id="eng_photo4">
  <title>Table <quote>The experiments.</quote></title>
  <xref linkend="photo4" /><?br?>
Fig. 1. The monkey unlocking a device.<?br?>
Fig. 2. The monkey enters the open door.<?br?>
</formalpara>

<formalpara id="eng_photo5">
  <title>Table <quote>Recording experiments and stimulation by food</quote></title>
  <xref linkend="photo5" /><?br?>
Fig. 1. The monkey eating up his reward.<?br?>
Fig. 2. An additional reward.<?br?>
</formalpara>

<formalpara id="eng_photo6">
  <title>Table <quote>The monkey is stimulated by swinging</quote></title>
  <xref linkend="photo6" /><?br?>
Fig. 1. Preparation to swinging.<?br?>
Fig. 2. The swinging.<?br?>
</formalpara>

<formalpara id="eng_photo7">
  <title>Table <quote>Performance with drawer door</quote></title>
  <xref linkend="photo7" /><?br?>
Fig. 1. Door drawn aside from without.<?br?>
Fig. 2. Door drawn aside from within.<?br?>
Fig. 3. Getting out.<?br?>
</formalpara>

<formalpara id="eng_photo8">
  <title>Table <quote>Performances with hooks</quote></title>
  <xref linkend="photo8" /><?br?>
Fig. 1. The monkey is submitted an aggregate of 8 hooks.<?br?>
Fig. 2. Hook e<subscript>2</subscript> is being unlocked.<?br?>
Fig. 3. Hook e<subscript>3</subscript> is being unlocked.<?br?>
</formalpara>

<formalpara id="eng_photo9">
  <title>Table <quote>Performances with hooks, sliding bolts and latches</quote></title>
  <xref linkend="photo9" /><?br?>
Fig. 1. Hook Б out of a set of 8 is being unlocked.<?br?>
Fig. 2. Control of door when operating with a set of 8 hooks.<?br?>
Fig. 3. Opening a self-locking latch L out of the KLMN aggregate.<?br?>
Fig. 4. Opening sliding bolt F.<?br?>
</formalpara>

<formalpara id="eng_photo10">
  <title>Table <quote>Performances with sliding bolts</quote></title>
  <xref linkend="photo10" /><?br?>
Fig. 1. Opening sliding bolt I.<?br?>
Fig. 2. Combination of sliding bolts ROIP is submitted to monkey.<?br?>
</formalpara>

<formalpara id="eng_photo11">
  <title>Table <quote>Performances with sliding bolts</quote></title>
  <xref linkend="photo11" /><?br?>
Fig. 1. Groove-formed sliding bolt Y being opened.<?br?>
Fig. 2. Sliding bolt O out of aggregate ROI being opened.<?br?>
</formalpara>

<formalpara id="eng_photo12">
  <title>Table <quote>Performances with complex sliding bolts</quote></title>
  <xref linkend="photo12" /><?br?>
Fig. 1. Opening sliding bolt Y<subscript>1</subscript> out of aggregate X<subscript>2</subscript>, Y<subscript>1</subscript>, V<subscript>1</subscript>, W<subscript>1</subscript><?br?>
Fig. 2. Opening sliding bolt W<subscript>1</subscript> out of aggregate V<subscript>1</subscript>, W<subscript>1</subscript>, X<subscript>2</subscript>, Y<subscript>1</subscript><?br?>
</formalpara>

<formalpara id="eng_photo13">
  <title>Table <quote>Unfastening excentre-handle turning locks and centre-handle turning locks</quote></title>
  <xref linkend="photo13" /><?br?>
Fig. 1. Unfastening excentre-handle turning lock S out of aggregate ST.<?br?>
Fig. 2. Unfastening excentre-handle turning lock T out of aggregate ST.<?br?>
Fig. 3. Opening door after unfastening centre-handle turning locks U and &#0220;.<?br?>
Fig. 4. Unfastening centre-handle turning lock U.<?br?>
</formalpara>

<formalpara id="eng_photo14">
  <title>Table <quote>Unfastening centre-handle turning locks</quote></title>
  <xref linkend="photo14" /><?br?>
Fig. 1. Unfastening springy centre-handle turning lock Z<subscript>1</subscript><?br?>
Fig. 2. Unfastening springy centre-handle turning lock Z<subscript>1</subscript> out of aggregate Z<subscript>1</subscript>Z<subscript>2</subscript><?br?>
</formalpara>

<formalpara id="eng_photo15">
  <title>Table <quote>Unlocking combined devices</quote></title>
  <xref linkend="photo15" /><?br?>
Fig. 1. Unfastening centre-handle turning lock Z<subscript>3</subscript> (aggregate Z<subscript>3</subscript>Z<subscript>4</subscript>KM)<?br?>
Fig. 2. Opening latch M (aggregate Z<subscript>3</subscript>Z<subscript>4</subscript>KM)<?br?>
Fig. 3. Unwinding tape of aggregate (&#931;<subscript>3</subscript>, f<subscript>2</subscript>, Z<subscript>3</subscript>Z<subscript>4</subscript>)<?br?>
Fig. 4. Unlocking centre-handle turning lock Z<subscript>4</subscript> (of aggregate KMZ<subscript>3</subscript>Z<subscript>4</subscript>).<?br?>
</formalpara>

<formalpara id="eng_photo16">
  <title>Table <quote>Performances with sliding bolts and centre-handle turning locks</quote></title>
  <xref linkend="photo16" /><?br?>
Fig. 1. Opening sliding bolt with pawl (Y<subscript>2</subscript>).<?br?>
Fig. 2. Opening centre-handle turning lock a with slight springing action.<?br?>
</formalpara>

<formalpara id="eng_photo17">
  <title>Table <quote>Performances with chain and catch</quote></title>
  <xref linkend="photo17" /><?br?>
Fig. 1. Putting chain aside (C<subscript>3</subscript>).<?br?>
Fig. 2. Opening door after drawing chain (C<subscript>3</subscript>) aside.<?br?>
Fig. 3. Performance with catch (b).<?br?>
Fig. 4. Releasing catch (b) and opening door.<?br?>
</formalpara>

<formalpara id="eng_photo18">
  <title>Table <quote>Opening door strap with pawl</quote></title>
  <xref linkend="photo18" /><?br?>
Fig. 1. Extraction of pawl (d<subscript>2</subscript>) by mouth.<?br?>
Fig. 2. Drawing door strap aside.<?br?>
Fig. 3. Drawing door strap aside and control of door.<?br?>
Fig. 4. Opening door.<?br?>
</formalpara>

<formalpara id="eng_photo19">
  <title>Table <quote>Opening door strap with pawl out of aggregate d<subscript>0</subscript>d<subscript>1</subscript>d<subscript>2</subscript>d<subscript>3</subscript></quote></title>
  <xref linkend="photo19" /><?br?>
Fig. 1. Extraction of horizontal pawl out of looking bar.<?br?>
Fig. 2. Drawing out horizontal pawl after extraction of vertical pawl and setting aside lower horizontal door straps.<?br?>
</formalpara>

<formalpara id="eng_photo20">
  <title>Table <quote>Opening complex unit devices</quote></title>
  <xref linkend="photo20" /><?br?>
Fig. 1. Opening of interior lock by means of key (f<subscript>2</subscript>).<?br?>
Fig. 2. Unwinding tape.<?br?>
</formalpara>

<formalpara id="eng_photo21">
  <title>Table <quote>Opening door straps with unlocked padlocks</quote></title>
  <xref linkend="photo21" /><?br?>
Fig. 1. Submitting to monkey 2 door straps (one vertical and one horizontal closed with open padlocks).<?br?>
Fig. 2. Extraction of upper padlock out of door straps.<?br?>
</formalpara>

<formalpara id="eng_photo22">
  <title>Table <quote>Performance with padlocks locked by key</quote></title>
  <xref linkend="photo22" /><?br?>
Fig. 1. A moment of distraction.<?br?>
Fig. 2. At work (handling of upper locked padlock З<subscript>1</subscript>).<?br?>
</formalpara>

<formalpara id="eng_photo23">
  <title>Table <quote>Handling of padlocks</quote></title>
  <xref linkend="photo23" /><?br?>
Fig. 1. Padlock (З<subscript>1</subscript>) released out of door strap.<?br?>
Fig. 2. Upper door strap cast aside and padlock grasped.<?br?>
Fig. 3. Control of door.<?br?>
Fig. 4. Upper door strap drawn aside.<?br?>
</formalpara>

<formalpara id="eng_photo24">
  <title>Table <quote>Distraction and attention</quote></title>
  <xref linkend="photo24" /><?br?>
Fig. 1. Distraction of macaque from work.<?br?>
Fig. 2. Monkey gazing.<?br?>
</formalpara>

