<sect2>
<title>Some reflections on the structure of a woodland giant.</title>
<subtitle>(On the peculiarities of the skeletons of two Gorillas in the State Darwin-Museum of Moscow.)</subtitle>

<para>by Prof. Dr. Alexander Eric Kohts, Director of the Museum.</para>

&liniya;

<para>
It would not be easy to find another creatuv of the tropical forests so well provided 
with the external conditions of life, as the biggest modern anthropoids, who were 
discovered only a little more than a century ago in the jungles of Equatorial Africa.
</para>

<para>
Being essential a vegetarian the Gorilla can find his food anywhere. He needs not be 
afraid of droughts in the damp soil of the tropical forest and the grown-up gorilla-
male ensures both his own and his family's safety, the stregth of the lion and deftness 
of the leopard beang hardly able to resist enormous muscle &mdash; and jaws' power 
of the gigantic native of the Congo &mdash; or Cameruns forests.
</para>



<para>
Leaving aside the <quote>Mountain</quote> Gorillas, who resides as a protected 
creature in the Belgian reservation, and speaking especially about the Gorillas of the 
coast-region, we may be sure that his powerful structure and his strength have 
developed not in the fights with beasts of pray, but with his rivals of the same 
species. So we have here a clear case of the so called secondary sexual feature: it is 
well known that the difference between the size of males and females of this ape is 
very great, the males being nearly twice as big as the females.
<ulink type="original_page" url="2" />
</para>

<para>
So we may say that we have here a rather case when the powerful structure of the 
male is the result of mainly <emphasis role="bold">intrespecial</emphasis> fights 
and of those with animals of other species.
</para>

<para>
It is mainly during the fights with rivels of the same species that the powerful 
muscles of the body heve developed and also the crests of the scull which tower it 
like helmets where the muscles of the mighty both jaws are fastened.
</para>

<para>
All this makes &mdash; as is well known &mdash; the male-gorillas so different 
from gorilla-femals, who have no the skeleton-attributes of the males: the great 
protruding fangs and the scull-crests.
</para>

<para>But one thing is remarkable here: the astonishing variation of size and development of these crests.</para>

<para>
Partly connected with different local-races and partly as an individual peculiarity
<footnote><para>
See <emphasis role="bold">Harold Jefferson Coolidge</emphasis>, Jr.: 
<emphasis role="bold">A Revision Of The Genus Gorilla</emphasis>. &mdash; 
Cambridge, U.S.A. &mdash; 1929.
</para></footnote>
, this variability is clearly seen on two old males belonging to the same subspecies in 
the Darwin Museum.
</para>

<para>As is well known, there are cases when the skull of a grown-up gorilla male has no typical crests at all and in connection with it, the fangs are developed but slightly.</para>

<para>A good exemple of such specimen are may see on a skeleton in our Darwin Museum.</para>

<para>
The specimen was obtained from a zoological dealer in Leipzig. Misled by the absens 
of crests the man was sure that the skeleton was that of a gorilla female. As such it 
was ordered by correspondence by our Museum.
</para>

<para>But hier, from the first sight it bekame clear that it could belong only to a gorilla male, the skeleton being larger than that of an average ape of this sex.
<ulink type="original_page" url="3" />
</para>

<para>
But the most remarkable is then the structure of the skull, the crests being total 
laking. It wasthis fact, that made the trader think that the skeleton belonged to a 
female gorilla inspite of the big size of the anomals body.
</para>

<para>Examining the skull of this strange creature one cannot wondering at that fact that the Suturae are opened everywhre, making the skull look juvenile.</para>

<para>But the great bolk of the animal is in sharp striking contradiction to this so to say unshaped structure of the skull.</para>

<para>
One can explain this contradiction only in two ways: either the gorilla, 
notwihstanding his large stature was killed being not fully grown and but for the shot 
he would have continued to grow reaching finally the size, perhaps more than that of 
the once famous Tring-Gorilla.
</para>

<para>
Or- and that is much more probable &mdash; we have here a case of anomalous 
infantilism and this anomalous gorilla would have had to live to the end of his days 
without the usual attributes of an old male, without the crested skull and accordingly 
without the powerfull cranial muscles and fangs.
</para>

<para>
In both cases it would be natural to put the following question: can these attributes of 
the adult male Gorilla be so vitally, if side by side with the typical representatives of 
these spesiments can live and achieve more than the average bulk animals whose 
skull has stopped developing at a juvenil stage?
</para>

<para>
And we should not think that apes like that which has just been described can be 
found but very rarely. We have an interesting photo given to us 40 years ago by a 
firm in Hamburg (it does not exist now), which speciali-
<ulink type="original_page" url="4" />
zed in big anthropoids. This photo shows an adult Gorilla male with only rudiments 
of occipital crest, without any trace of the saggital one.
</para>

<para>
We may also remaind of an old male Gorilla skull without any traces of this crest on 
Table 5 of the splendid Monograph by Harold D. 
<emphasis role="bold">Coolidge</emphasis> jr. to say nothing about the crestless 
skull of a somewhat doubtful form called <quote>Pseudogorilla mayema</quote> by 
D.G. <emphasis role="bold">Elliot</emphasis>
<footnote><para>
See: <quote><emphasis role="bold">A Review of the Primates</emphasis></quote> 
by D.G. <emphasis role="bold">Elliot</emphasis>. Volume III Plate XXXII. 
&mdash; 1912.
</para></footnote>
and preserved in the Senkenbergian Museum in Frankfort am Main.
</para>

<para>
All this shows that adult <quote>crestless</quote> gorilla males are not so rare to be 
found especially if we take into consideration that the total amount of gorilla sculls in 
the museums is not very great.
</para>

<para>
Of course it is not difficult to explaine such cases of permanent juvenility of some 
male gorillas, bearing in mind that all the typical characters of an adult male which 
they lack (scull-crests, powerful jaw-museles, nightly canin-tooth) are secondary-
sexual signs, weapons for fighting of the males among themselves and not the means 
of defending from other animals.
</para>

<para>
And it is easy to imagine that these permanently juvenile Gorilla-males either 
refrained from fights for females at all or having joined a battle with normal males 
regularely suffered a defeat and remained <quote>bachelors</quote> for life.
</para>



<para>
Let us pass to another Gorilla skeleton, possesed by our Museum. There is no doubt 
of it being unique in
<ulink type="original_page" url="5" />
the collections of the world.
</para>

<para>As to its size it is even some larger than that of our two <quote>normal</quote> specimens.</para>

<para>Absolutaly obliterated Suturae of the skull show that the gorilla was an old one. The teeth which are eaten up to a great extend shows the same.</para>

<para>
But the most paradoxical in the structure of the skull is the greatest asymmetry or, 
speaking precisely, mutilation of the face-bones, which has partly touched the 
cerebral portion of the cranium.
</para>

<para>
The whole skull is as twisted and wrung in a most rude way: all the face-bones are 
pushed sharply to the right and the horizontal level of the eye-orbits is directed 
sideways and upwards in such a way that the left eye-orbit is higher than the right one 
approximately by two thirds of the orbit.
</para>

<para>It is easy to understand that all this asymmetry affected all the structure of the animals head. According to our inquiries this Gorilla was completely blind of one eye.</para>

<para>No less fatally affected this deformity of the scull the structure of the mouth: the jaws don't meet correctely and the incisors don't close up.</para>

<para>
It is very remarkable that in spite of these imperfect jaws, the little actuality of their 
functions the saggittal crest and consequently the masseter &mdash; and temporal 
muscles must have been developed in a proper way.
</para>

<para>
Naturally arises the question: how to concilite this obvious inferiority of the half-
blind giant with a mutilated face and twisted jaws with the
<ulink type="original_page" url="6" />
Theorie of the severe conditions of living, the <quote>Struggle for life</quote>?
</para>

<para>The character of the deformation of all face-bones and the complect obliteration of the Cranial suturae shows that the deformity appeared when the animal was a yung one.</para>

<para>
It might have been the result of a mechanical trauma, or inflected in a fight, or when 
the ape was playing with its relatives, or &mdash; which is the most probable of all 
&mdash; the deformity was arised in the mother's belly in the quitness of the 
embryonic life.
</para>

<para>
But whatever it might be, even considering the age of an adult Gorilla being 
approximately twice as long as that of mankind (as it was in the case of the well-
known giant gorilla <quote>Bobby</quote> who died in the Berlin Zoo in the age of 
thirteen after reching puberty) &mdash; we must admit that our defective specimen 
has lived many decades in his native forests without having suffered from his obvious 
inadaptation.
</para>

<para>
We can assert with confidence that a man with such defects could have lived as far as 
to our Gorillas age only if he had been taken the most loving care of, whereas our 
half-blind gorilla would have probably lived still many more years, would he not 
fallen as victim of a hunters bullet.
</para>



<para>Old Gorilla males can live in their natural home to a very old age. This can be proved by the skull of a very aged Gorilla of our Museum with half eaten up black and carious teeth.</para>

<para>
And although such senile skulls are less remarkable of course than those of the two 
anomalous males, which has been discribed in this paper, &mdash; such senile 
specimens deserves full attention.
<ulink type="original_page" url="7" />
</para>



<para>
Even admitting that our toothless <quote>patriarch</quote> Gorilla once had his 
teeth in proper order and that to get the Gorillas usual food (tubers, leaves, roots and 
fruits) even the remnants of molars are sufficient, &mdash; still the example of this 
old toothless male only supports what has been said about the severity of the 
<quote>struggle for existance</quote> which we read in the popular exposition of 
the Darwin's theorie.
</para>

<para>
These perennial <quote>bachelors</quote> (without skull-crests) and these innate 
life-invalids (half blind with disformed faces and jaws), these toothless, decrepit old 
Gorillas might have been lived still many years in their native junles, if they have not 
been killed by some hunters.
</para>



<para>
Of course, taken alone, the examples like those which just have been discribed, 
perhaps are not convincing enough, but in addition to other testimonies and 
arguments of similar kind and taking into consideration that the named Anthropoids 
are relative rare in museums, &mdash; the above description of some Gorilla-skulls 
in possetion of the Darwin-museum may justify our short essay, our scepsis in respect 
to the estimation of the vital role of some structure's of some very distant relatives of 
ours.
<ulink type="original_page" url="14" />
</para>

<sect3>
<title>Explanation of the Plates.</title>

<para>Plate I. &mdash; Fig. 1. Crestless Skull of an adult giant Gorilla-male</para>

<para>Fig. 2. &mdash; Deformed Skull of an adult Gorilla male</para>

<para>Fig. 3. &mdash; Skull of a very old Gorilla-Male with half eaten teeth</para>



<para>Plate II. &mdash; Fig 1. Skeleton of the giant Gorilla with crestless</para>

<para>Skull. Fig. 2. &mdash; Skeleton of old Gorilla with deformed Skull</para>

<para>Fig 3. Four Skeletons of Gorilla males in the Darwin Museum:</para>

<para>
Skeletons <quote>a</quote> and <quote>b</quote>: normal Gorillas, to show the 
variability of the skull crests and especially for comparison with the skeletons 
<quote>c</quote> and <quote>d</quote>: the two abnormal specimens, concerning 
the great dimension of them.
<ulink type="original_page" url="15" />
</para>
</sect3>
</sect2>
