<sect2>
<orderedlist>
<listitem><para>PREFACE</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>INTRODUCTION. Object of research and methods</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>CHAPTER I. Records of observation.
<orderedlist>
<listitem><para>Opening door</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Unfastening hooks</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Unfastening latches</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Unfastening sliding bolts</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Unfastening turning-locks (excentre-handle)</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Unfastening turning-locks (centre-handle)</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Unfastening catch</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Unfastening chain</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Unfastening door strap, simple and complicated</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Unlocking inside padlock with key</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Unwinding tape</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Unlocking outside padlock with key</para></listitem>
</orderedlist>
</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>CHAPTER II. Analysis of evidence obtained when working with units.
<orderedlist>
<listitem><para>Enumeration of accomplishments</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Means for attaining end</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Description</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Tempo</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Method used for accomplishing trick (initial and ultimate procedure)</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Rate of performance
  <orderedlist>
  <listitem><para>First unlocking experiment</para></listitem>
  <listitem><para>Last unlocking experiment</para></listitem>
  <listitem><para>Greatest duration of experiment</para></listitem>
  <listitem><para>Least duration of experiment</para></listitem>
  </orderedlist>
</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Improvement in rate of performance</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Rate of improvement</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Average duration of unlocking</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Retentivenes in memorizing trick</para></listitem>
</orderedlist>
</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>CHAPTER III. Analysis of evidence obtained when working with aggregates (Serial Sets).
<orderedlist>
<listitem><para>Enumeration of accomplishments</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Means, description and tempo of performance in mastering the trick</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Method used for accomplishing trick (initial and ultimate performance)</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Rate of performance
  <orderedlist>
  <listitem><para>First unlocking experiment</para></listitem>
  <listitem><para>Last unlocking experiment</para></listitem>
  <listitem><para>Greatest duration of experiment</para></listitem>
  <listitem><para>Least duration of experiment</para></listitem>
  </orderedlist>
</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Improvement in rate of performance</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Rate of improvement</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Average duration of unlocking</para></listitem>
</orderedlist>
</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>CHAPTER IV. Specific negative features of the monkey's work.
<orderedlist>
<listitem><para>Waste of work</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Haphazard unlocking</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>No account taken of device already being unlocked</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Automatism</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Hastiness</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Distraction</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Limited range of exploration</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Inconsiderable imitative tendencies</para></listitem>
</orderedlist>
</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>CHAPTER V. Perforamce with Units versus that with Aggregates (Serial Sets).</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>CONCLUSION. Prognosis with regard to the capability of the monkey to master the process of work
and also in respect of the genetic place occupied by modern monkeys</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>ENGLISH SUMMARY.</para></listitem>
</orderedlist>
</sect2>
