<para>
The present investigation is based upon the author's personal obser-vations of a male chimpanzee (Joni) at the age of 1&half; to 4 years
<footnote><para>
I wish to express my acknowledgment to Professor Brandes (Dresden), Prof. R. M. Yerkes (Yale), the Director of the Florida Anthropoid Station and to three scientists of this stations (Dr. C. F. Jacobsen, Dr. O. Z. Tinklepaugh, Dr. J. G. Yoshioka) for determining the age of my chimpanze <quote>Joni</quote>.
</para></footnote>
 and on the records of the behaviour of the author's son (Roody) taken from the moment of his birth and up to the age of four. 
</para>

<para>
The observations of the chimpanzee were taken during the period from 1913 to 1916 while the child's behaviour-records belong to the years 1925—1929. 
</para>

<para>
The respective notes are thus separated by a stretch of 12 years. It should be stated that the second chronicle is a typical <quote>mother's diary</quote> with daily entries regarding all new phases in her son's behaviour. At the time of its writing, the diary was in no way intended for comparative psychological studies, and it was only at a much later date, namely in 1929, that it occurred to the writer to draw up a psychological parallel between the two subjects: man and ape. 
</para>

<para>
The systematization of the records which had been collected over a lapse of time of 7 years took full five years of time. 
</para>

<para>
All the illustrations appended to the book are original photographs (the major portion of which is printed here for the first time) or freehand sketches made either after photos or from nature. All the sketches were made under the author's personal direction and supervision. The sketches of the chimpanzee's head are schematic. They are based on observations of the chimpanzee's mimics and are the result of superimposing or putting together a number of photographs. 
</para>

<para>
Our comparative investigation of the two subjects, the human child and the infant ape, has shown the two to possessmuch in common with respect to many essential features of behaviour.
This was of course by no means unexpected; even the most superficial parallel observation of the chimpanzee and the human being at once reveals the <quote>human-like</quote> features of the ape, whence one is apt to leap to the conclusion that since the ape is <quote>almost human</quote>, man <quote>must evi-dently have originated from an anthropoid ancestor</quote>.
</para>

<para>
And indeed, in visualizing the natural motor habits of the infant chimpanzee — his lying and sitting postures, his ability to stand upright, to move about erect, to jump and to climb — we shall not be slow to see that the whole of this range of motor habits equally belongs to the human child of the same age. 
</para>

<para>
Let us now in first place consider the <emphasis>instincts</emphasis> of the chimpanzee and those of the human infant as expressed in <emphasis>behaviour, and, in parti-cular let us analyze the behaviour dictated by the selfsupport instinct</emphasis> (expressed in <emphasis>finding food or drink, providing for sleep and grooming</emphasis>). The similarity is here striking indeed. 
</para>

<para>
Similarly to the human child the little chimpanzee, feeling hungry, will never withdraw his searching glance from the person who is in the habit of feeding him, will follow him step by step and will constantly try to attract his attention by deliberate loud crying. 
</para>

<para>
Again, the chimpanzee will handle raw food in a manner very similar to that of the human child. Thus, he will start clutching at the food, removing the skin of vegetables and fruit with his teeth and fingers and flinging the kernels. 
</para>

<para>
He easily masters the art of drinking from a cup and using a spoon (though both infants prefer to use their hands). Again, quite like the human baby, the little chimpanzee greedily attacks the food he is offe-red, jumps from dish to dish (in case several different kinds of food are served at the same time) and obstinately refuses to share a tid-bit with anyone. In his eagerness to keep the favourite morsel to himself, the chimpanzee — quite like the child — resorts to a number of devices as turning his back on the would-be usurper, protecting himself with his hand or hastening to finish up the food (if someone should pretend to take the piece away). In the presence of others, or when the taking of food is accompanied by some pleasant distraction, both babies will eat with particular relish. Both children display a definitely selective attitude towards food and show a marked preference in regard of a vegetarian diet — milk, sweet-meats, fruit (even carrot juice and lemons); both likewise show a definite tendency towards the use of carbonaceous and lime-containing food-stuffs. 
</para>

<para>
Both like to sleep in immediate proximity to the person who looks after them, being particularly eager to cuddle on the latter's knees or on the same bed, where both will affectionately nestle against their protector; both try to lay their heads as high as possible on the pillow, and usually sleep on one side with arm under head and leg drawn somewhat inward towards body. In cold weather both will draw up their blankets; while they will put their legs wide apart and throw aside all bedclothes during the hot time of the year. 
</para>

<para>
Both, when sleeping, display a tendency towards spasmodic movements and snoring. When they chance to be laid to sleep in a cot unprotected by any kind of grating, both infants frequently catch hold of the nearest firm object and continue to cling to it tenaciously even when fast asleep. 
</para>

<para>
When awake, the chimpanzee and the child have no objection towards being subjected to diverse hygienic treatment such as washing, combing or nail-cutting. They also frequently indulge in self-examination, and they are in the habit of constantly cleaning the interstices between their fingers, biting their nails, examining different parts of their skin or fidgeting with some casual pimples, wounds, prickles and scratches which they may happen to discover on their bodies. When painlessly doctored both show no evidence of particular repulsion. 
</para>

<para>Both children ere easily taught to soap their hands, to use a handker-chief and to wipe their mouths with a serviette.</para>

<para>The <emphasis>instincts of self-preservation, self-defence and attack</emphasis> are strongly developed in both infants. </para>

<para>As a matter of fact, Joni and Roody were both rather great cowards. Indeed, in taking stock of all <quote>frightening</quote> stimuli the question not so much arises of what they were, but of what they were not afraid. </para>

<para>
The principal stimuli eliciting fear responses were as follows: every-thing unexpected; all sharply defined stimuli (light, sound, touch); large objects; everything new, e. g. new objects, new people; unusual surroundings; animals never seen before; gatherings of people; large animals (horses, cows); very tall men; loud shouting; noise; shooting; snapping; thunder; lightning; magnesium flashlights; brilliantly illuminated premises; darkness; black objects; self-propelled vehicles; live animals with sudden or jerky movements, stuffed animals and birds, or the representations of certain animals in pictures. 
</para>

<para>
The response to a fright-causing stimulus likewise finds expression in a very similar way with both infants. When frightened, both strainedly open their eyes as wide as possible, transfix the fear-causing object and remain motionless in the same posture as if spell-bound; from time to time they shiver, their heart begins to beat faster, cold sweat appears on their faces and they do all they can to find come suitable hiding place or to put themselves under somebody's protection or else run away from the fear-causing stimulus. 
</para>

<para>A long-acting fear stimulus invariably causes both infants to raise a violent outcry. </para>

<para>
Many common features can also be observed if we examine the active <emphasis>self-protecting behaviour</emphasis>. Both infants display very much similar behaviour in making threatening gestures, stamping their feet, producing a rapping noise with the fist, tapping against the offending object with the palm of the hand, pinching, scratching or biting it; and occasionally even raising some object (stone or stick) as if to hit it (in case the infant is afraid of coming into direct contact with the fear-causing stimulus). 
</para>

<para>The mimics of anger are also very much similar in both infants: in either case, the upper part of the face becomes frowned and the teeth and gums are plainly to be seen. </para>

<para>
Both Roody and Joni are prone to pass into the aggressive mood under circumstances other that those which cause the display of the self-protection instinct: thus, they generally feel angry when their diverse instinctive requirements (such as those connected with food, drink and sleep) are not properly catered for, and they likewise are apt to grow wild when their desires — and frequently altogether unreasonable ones — are interfered with or generally when their actions are in some way thwarted. 
</para>

<para>
It is interesting to note that both infants would easily display anger or show a feeling of vengeance) on seeing supposedly wronged humans (especially if the latter belonged to the class of <quote>friends</quote>) and would do all they could to chastise the offender. Both subjects would also frequently display rancour when claims were made with respect to their alleged property or when their freedom of locomotion was in any way interfered with. 
</para>

<para>
The instinct of <emphasis>property</emphasis> was strongly marked in both the human and the anthropoid child, and it found its expression not only in a manifest aversion to share a favourite tid-bit, but also in the careful safeguard of all available belongings; though at the same time their stock-in-trade was liable to be constantly replenished by all kind of new acquisitions, some of which definitely belonged to the class of somebody else's property. 
</para>

<para>
A careful study of the objects acquired by both infants, with special-attention focused on the <quote>favourites</quote>, permits us to establish their predilections and even, may be, to throw some light on their <emphasis>aesthetic preferences</emphasis>. 
</para>

<para>
In first place it seems to be worth noting that both were equally eager to catch hold of <emphasis>brilliant, transparent</emphasis> and <emphasis>brightly</emphasis> coloured objects (especially when the colours belonged to the first half of the spectrum). Both shared a well defined <emphasis>dislike</emphasis> towards <emphasis>dark-coloured</emphasis> objects which in all probability caused fright in them. 
</para>

<para>
As to the size of the preferred objects, both infants gave especial attention to <emphasis>miniature</emphasis> things towards which the human child even seemed to feel a kind of tenderness; the preferred form was certainly that of the <emphasis>sphere</emphasis>; in the field of tactile sensations, there was a well defined preference in respect of all that was <emphasis>soft, smooth, flexible</emphasis> and <emphasis>reticular</emphasis>; in the field of thermal sensations — there was a definite attraction towards all that was warm; among olfactory stimuli — <emphasis>fruit smells</emphasis> were invariably preferred; while all behaviour related to the sense of taste definitely suggests that both infants preferred <emphasis>sweet or sour-sweet</emphasis> foodstuffs. Both infants were eager toappropriate themselves for playthings such objects as brilliant or brightly coloured plates; silk, velvet and satin rags; pieces of transparent oilcloth; glasses; lace; pieces of india-rubber, etc. 
</para>

<para>
Not only were both subjects reluctant to part with these toys, when summoned to do so, but they were even apt to carry them about wherever they would go. Small wooden balls appeared to be especial favourites. 
</para>

<para>
Both infants showed a definite tendency tovards <emphasis>self-adornment</emphasis>, displaying particular preference in regard of brightly coloured fabrics. It may be of interest to note that both were particularly fond of hanging brightly coloured pieces of cloth round their necks like scarfs. They even sometimes went so far as to bring the two ends of a scarf together near the throat, thus making themselves something like a necktie. 
</para>

<para>
Both infants were certainly <emphasis>freedom-seeking</emphasis> creatures. They hated being warmly clad or huddled up, and always began crying when locked up in the narrow confines of a room; on the other hand, they exhibited the most buoyant joy when allowed to venture abroad — to the free expanse of yard, field of forest. Admitted to open space, they would try to extend indefinitely the range of their activity and locomotion. 
</para>

<para>
Both again had the <emphasis>social instinct</emphasis> in common, this instinct, quite naturally, finding its principal expression in intercourse with other <emphasis>children</emphasis> or placing themselves under the care and protection of an adult. In case friendly contact with the latter was interrupted, both little ones immediately began seeking some other source of protection, apparently fearing to remain alone, without any guardianship. 
</para>

<para>
Both children expressed preference towards their nurse by distin-guishing her from among all other people; they expressed jubilant joy on her arrival and would cry on her departure; they wished to remain day and night with their adult friend; in case of some ailment, their attachment would become particularly strong; under untoward or difficult circumstances it was always to the preferred person that recourse was made; again if was towards this very person that all affectionate feelings and tenderness were directed; and lastly, it was none other but the nurse who was allowed, to perform various hygienic and curative manipulations in case of illness or physical ailment. 
</para>

<para>
Both children showed a touching sympathy for their nurse when they saw that she was ill, and each of them tried to do his utmost to comfort or cure her as best he could. Both infants were ready to take action in defence of their nurse and this not only when some would-be threatening gesture was made by an outsider bat even in case such an intimaditing movement was performed by someone from the inmates of the household. 
</para>

<para>
The <emphasis>expression of affection</emphasis> was similar with both infants. When stimulated by tender feelings, both Joni and Roody would run , up to their protector, huddle up close and hug her, then tenderly touch her facewith their hands and, slightly press her cheeks with open mouth, panting all the while. Both infants easily learnt the kissing movement, though the reaction appears with the child only at a more advanced age
<footnote><para>
My child learnt to kiss only at the age of 2 years.
</para></footnote>
 while with the ape it is manifestly artificial and comparatively rarely used. 
</para>

<para>
Affectionate behaviour is in both cases of a well-marked egocentric character and is closely associated with <emphasis>jealousy</emphasis>; in fast, Roody and Joni both claimed a title to monopolistic ownership of the beloved person. In all cases when the latter attempted in their presence to show affection to others — no matter children or adults — both subjects would invariably give definite signs of hostility towards the recipient of caresses. 
</para>

<para>
Both little ones established a sharp line of demarcation between <quote>our people</quote> and <quote>outsiders</quote>. Towards the former they would display a frank and unrestrained attitude, while they would invariably be on their guard with the latter; but both were equally eager to indulge in merry play with man and animal on every possible occasion. No happening or event caused them such pain as being left alone, while there seemed to be nothing that could evoke such joy as active intercourse with other living beings. 
</para>

<para>
When brought into contact with persons alien to the household, both children would show a range of responses which differed widely in accordance with the temperament of the newcomer; they would be careful and restrained with quietly-disposed visitors; stand upon their guard and remain full of reserve with the gloomy and morose; and would always be apt to display merriment when brought in the presence of persons of a lively disposition. 
</para>

<para>
The <emphasis>imitation</emphasis> instinct is well marked in both infants, both being most susceptidle to catching-up various emotions (such as fear, sorrow, joy and even anger) from the various persons with whom they would come in contact. On seeing the respective facial gestures and movements or even when hearing incoherent sounds, they were always prone to imitate them. 
</para>

<para>
Especially remarkable is the considerable range of coincidence observed in the <emphasis>mimics, movements</emphasis> and <emphasis>sounds</emphasis> expressing the <emphasis>principal emotions</emphasis> of the two children: to this class of gesture-similarities belong: trumpet-like protrusion of lips — when excited; wrinkling forehead, closing eyes, wide-opening of mouth, crying, weeping — when deject or sad; smiling, haphazard movement of hands, reproduction of sounds — when pleased; pressing-in lip corners and forming quadrangular mouth-opening when disgusted; mouth wide open — when astonished; protrusion of tightly closed lips, touching object with lips or index finger — when attention is attracted; turning back upon offender — when supposedly injured or hurt in feelings. Similar facial gestures and mimics were also observed in the expression of suffering, anger and affection. 
</para>

<para>The major part of the stimuli eliciting the abovementioned responses were also similar.</para>

<para>
When on the verge of making a tense movement, calling for close coordination of hand-fingers, both child and ape would invariably stretch out their lips sidewise and then tighten them. 
</para>

<para>
Both children perform a number of similar <emphasis>imitatory actions</emphasis> such as: sweeping the floor, using a rag for wiping a pool of water on the floor, trying to tack-in nails, unlocking padlocks, getting down objects with the help of a stick, turning on electric switches, opening hooks, drawing lines on paper with pen or pencil. 
</para>

<para>
Both children are familiar with certain uses of the following imple-ments frequently employed by them in the round of their daily activity: cup, spoon, knife, handkerchief, serviette, blanket, sweeping brush, duster stick, hammer, key, pencil, pen. 
</para>

<para>
It is worth mentioning that both infants evidently guided by analogy, frequently substituted one instrument for another: in default of a pencil both Roody and Joni would attempt scratching paper with a nail, stick or even with their fingernail; lacking ink, both would dip their fingers into milk, broth, water, or previously ejected saliva and try making various figures on paper; when no hammer was available, they would attempt to tack in nails with their fists, with a stone or with any other heavy object that might come their way; pocket handkerchiefs and serviettes were not unfrequently substituted by stray pieces of paper. 
</para>

<para>
Their imitative actions were, however, at best, but of poor efficiency; thus, failing to see the relative dimensions of latch and key, both would attempt to fit a tiny key into a large opening and naturally fail in their endeavour. 
</para>

<para>
Following the lead of adults, both subjects were prone to <emphasis>reproduce</emphasis> certain <emphasis>sounds</emphasis>, such as banging of hand, producing a clicking noise with lips, rhytmical tapping of bent fingers against some solid material; both also had a marked tendency towards onomatoepia, though the range of imitated sounds differed widely for each subject. 
</para>

<para>But there is indeed no other sphere of activity where the similarity of the human child and the infant chimpanzee should be so manifestly striking as in <emphasis>play</emphasis>.</para>

<para>
Both infants showed the same passionate — we may even say tem-pestuous — zest for <emphasis>moving games</emphasis> such as are connected with running, sliding, wrestling, etc. Both were equally ready to take in new playmates such as a human being or a live animal or — in default of such — to amuse themselves quite alone. During long periods of time, both Roody and Joni could find complete satisfaction in self-contained motion. They would run about the rooms, make circles round the whole flat, dash from place to place or from corner to corner, then perhaps settle down for a moment on some piece of furniture, as if resting, but only in a second to renew their activity with tenfold energy, finally falling down in sheer exhaustion. <quote>Run, run, run, round, round, round!</quote> would shout Roody at the age of 1&half;—2 years — prancing about the room — just like Joni — and involving all and everybody he could find on the way in his whirlwind motion. No less enthusiastic were both little ones when given the possibility to indulge in wrestling games. Again, they would seem to like nothing better than being squeezed, swung, carried about or turned topsy-turvy, and they invariably found a tremendous source of delight in climbing upon shoulders, knees and legs and-travelling or swinging up and down on these improvised vehicles or swings. 
</para>

<para>
Any toy vehicle or object in any way supposed to be suitable for <quote>transport</quote> was invariably welcomed with exhuberant joy. Indeed, there appeared to be nothing capable of giving so much pleasure to both little ones as perambulators, toy automobiles, wooden horses, chairs, benches, baskets, pillows, and even slippers and balls which latter also by the way, appeared, to be classed as means of locomotion. 
</para>

<para>
Both Roody and Joni would accost these seemingly unpromising means of transport as if they were actual carriages and effect their peregrination with the greatest zest and eagerness. Both thoroughly enjoyed being conveyed in some genuine vehicle and appeared to like it the better the quicker, was the rate of motion. 
</para>

<para>
Jumping vertically up or jumping down from some elevation was a favourite pastime with both infants; no less pleasure was apparently derived from hanging onto doors
<footnote><para>
Roody was able to swing on a door only at the age of 4 but not before.
</para></footnote>
 and swinging about together with the door, though this kind of amusement generally lasted but for a few seconds at a time; finally, an unending source of pleasure was derived from rolling about on the floor and sliding down more or less steeply inclined boards. Both Roody and Joni were in a state of perpetual motion, ever finding new combinations of playful activities and it would take the author all the pains in the world to teach them to sit quiet even at mealtime. Once, when told to stop dangling his legs, Roody exclaimed: <quote>Well, with me something must always be kept going</quote>! — an avowal the strength of which was also fully and continuously borne out by all the behaviour of the infant-ape. 
</para>

<para>
No less enthusiasm was manifeston the part of both infants when they indulged in <emphasis>gymnastical</emphasis> exercise, such as swinging, climbing up wood-en and rope ladders, twisting ropes into strands and subsequently letting them go with a crack and resulting rapid untwisting, the performer merrily spinning round like a top, till the rope was finally unwound. Not unfrequently both would devise the most risky stunts, occasionally involving even serious danger to life or limb. 
</para>

<para>
 Both infants seemed particularly delighted when they were given occasion to indulge in <emphasis>competitive</emphasis> exercise. Such forms of sporting contest as running bars, or catching up a partner seemed to be accompanied with especial zest and it could frequently be observed that both subjects would fly into such fits of passion that the losing partner would often be on the very verge of bursting into torrents of tears or at least getting badly angered. 
</para>

<para>It seems of interest to note that both infants invariably preferred to run away from a <emphasis>stronger</emphasis> partner than to pursue a <emphasis>weaker</emphasis> one. </para>

<para>
Playing at hide and seek was accompanied by the same manifestations. Both subjects almost always preferred hiding from <emphasis>a stronger</emphasis> playmate or <emphasis>seeking a weaker</emphasis> one. 
</para>

<para>
Acting on their own initiative, both infants would often erect <emphasis>obstructions</emphasis> to be overcome in course of playful activity, or they would purposedly introduce <emphasis>complications</emphasis> into such forms of exercise as running, climbing, or swinging. Thus, in course of his gymnastical performances on a trapeze or simply when running about, Joni would introduce some object between his head and neck, taking all the pains in the world not to let it go during his perormances. Occasionally, he would grasp with his foot some rag or a boot-lace with trailing shoe and would prance about the room, his progress being at every moment checked by some intervening obstacle. Now, he would be held up by a piece ot furniture; or the boot-lace having become entangled, his progress would be arrested in some narrow passage; but every time he would get loose — sometimes with difficulty — and continue his adventurous progress with unslackened energy and zeal. Roody would frequently make himself barriers and jump over them or else build a kind of narrow and shaking plank-bridge and carefully make his passage over it, eagerly watchful lest he should lose his equilibrium. Again, in performing feats on the trapeze, Roody would often carry in his hand a heavy plush teddy-bear, being of course strongly handicapped by this rather weighty piece of altogether unnecessary ballast. 
</para>

<para>
Indeed, unhampered locomotion apparently failed to give either of the little ones the same amount of pleasure as did obstructed motion. Most varied objects were taken to serve as improvised obstacles: thus, Joni liked having recourse to various knitted fabrics, torn baskets, ropes which he himself had previously entangled, etc. On happening to come across a rubber ring, Joni would always first introduce his finger through the opening, and then gradually begin expanding it to provide a sufficient passageway for the whole hand, next for the head and, then for the whole body. At last, he would drag himself all through, angrily panting and grunting all the while. 
</para>

<para>
On seeing a torn net in his bed, Roody immediately recognizes that good luck has come his way and obstinately refuses to get into bed in the usual way. Instead, he drags himself through the torn network and reaches his couch only after a considerable display of effort, accompa-nied by loud grunting and snorting. Despite having wasted about ten times as much time as he would have done in following the normal way, he from the very moment of his lucky discovery invariably prefers the difficult crawling-in procedure. 
</para>

<para>
It is but quite natural that <emphasis>movable objects</emphasis> should appear particularly <emphasis>attractive</emphasis> to both subjects. Indeed it can in no way be considered a mere concidence that both Roody and Joni preferred wooden and rubber balls to all other varieties of toys. Both infants were particulary loth to part with these their favourite playthings and could spend hours in throwing, pushing or catching up a ball. Nearly as much entertainment was apparently derived from playing with round baskets, pushing perambulators or even roller-mounted chairs. In fact, on coming across every description of easily moving objects, both infants could never refrain from attempting to actuate them in this or other way. Thus, they would repeatedly open and close doors, windows, cupboards, start banging piano-lids, turn the wheel of a sowing machine, rotate turning stools etc. 
</para>

<para>
Often, both would catch hold of stray objects that had chanced to come their way and begin glamorously scattering them all over the rooms, with the result that the whole premise would soon become a scene of complete chaos bestrewed with broken, dilapidated or thrown about pieces of furniture or household utensils. 
</para>

<para>
The <emphasis>watching of motion</emphasis> appeared to be in no way less stimulating. When in the city, both intants would eagerly watch the unfolding of street traffic; they would keenly and attentively follow the progress of pedestrians, show great interest in street happenings and never de-tract their searching gaze from passing vehicles. So absorbed and enraptured would they become that it was sometimes hardly possible to draw them from their favourite pastime even by raising one's voice. When in the country, both infants would gaze with curiosity at herds of passing cows, playing children or any other developments of rural life, that might come their way. Even the progress of such slowly moving beings as caterpillars, ants, beetles and cockroaches seemed to intrigue our subjects. Joni would frequently take a piece of straw and start worrying a group of cockroaches that had quietly settled down in the slits of his cage. He apparently found much amusement iu witnessing the flight of the insects and would invariably start his little game afresh on seeing them recover from their first panic. Roody could watch ants running about for indefinitely long periods of time. 
</para>

<para>
It is but quite natural that <emphasis>playing with larger animals</emphasis> should appear particularly attractive to both Roody and Joni. Deprived of the compa-nionship of children of the same age they seemed to feel tremendously happy when opportunities were at hand for such exploits as pursuing dogs or pigs, frightening chicks, crows or sparrows, hunting down or frightening cats, etc. 
</para>

<para>The accompaniment of <emphasis>noise and loud sounds</emphasis> always added particular zest to playful activity. The greater the noise, bang, tantara or uproar the more both seemed enraptured. </para>

<para>
There was, in fact, no greater source of delight for both infants than dragging about clattering chains, jingling keys, beating or drumming against walls with metal rods, wooden bails and the like. Genuine drums or even kettle drums seemed particulary welcome. It, in fact, struck one that the more deafening was the noise the greater the pleasure derived therefrom. 
</para>

<para>
Lacking other more varied forms of entertainment, Roody and Joni would often clap their hands, bang their fists, stamp their feet or click their feet. Both enjoyed slamming the key-board of a piano. 
</para>

<para>
Much in common could again be observed in <quote><emphasis>experimentation</emphasis></quote> games involving such novel and unknown elements as <emphasis>fire, water, sand, hard, transparent or elastic</emphasis> objects. 
</para>

<para>
Both were greatly attracted by fire and had to be stopped in their attempts to reach at it, lest they should burn themselves. They seemed to be deeply stirred by the lighting of candles or the firing of a stove, while the switching on of electric light appeared to be a source of everlasting enjoyment. Water seemed to be no less attractive. The sight of any amount of this element would induce Roody and Joni to devise no end of new and apparently most thrilling amusements. Thus, Joni would immediately avail himself of the opportunity for taking some water into his mouth and start rinsing it — this occupation often taking up quite a stretch of time; both Joni and Roody on seeing a pool of water would never miss the opportunity of splashing about in it; when sitting in front of a basin of water Roody (just as Joni) would invariably take into his hands as much water as he possibly could, and then lift his hands and let it run out, only to resume the operation again the very next second. Roody liked taking various objects and letting them float or sink in the water of a basin; on seeing spilt water both would moisten their fingers and start drawing various patterns, or else just simply splash the water about. The water held in a pedal-washstand seemed to have a particulary intriguing effect. On seeing the jet emerge both would either attempt catching it with their mouths or try to grasp it in their fists or, again, simply splash it about bewetting both themselves and all their immediate surrounings. 
</para>

<para>
Both Roody and Joni had a natural tendency towards digging in <emphasis>earth</emphasis> and <emphasis>sand</emphasis>. They liked collecting small stones and gazing at them. Oftentimes they could be seen playing with sand, strewing it, kneading it, casting it about or filling and emptying any handy receptacles that might come their way. The whole process was always accompanied by most eager contemplation, new interesting moments being apparently always found in course of the different manipulations. 
</para>

<para>
Any <emphasis>hard</emphasis> objects, such as stones, bits of glass; nails, stray pieces of wood, sticks or matches were taken stock of and immediately utilized for play. Thus, whenever he came across a large stone, Joni would always carefully examine it, take it into his mouth, gnaw at it or scratch it and at last throw it away in some definite and apparently preconceived direction. When seeing a smaller stone, nail or piece of glass his practice would consist in taking the said object into his mouth and start rolling it about, sucking it and smacking his lips; but never would he swallow any non-digestible materials. Roody had also been found to put stones into his mouth. Especial preference on the part of both infants was to be observed with reference to <emphasis>sharp</emphasis> objects, such as small sticks, twigs, bits of straw, etc. It is really remarkable to find that both would seem to enjoy actually pricking their hands with such sharp objects or else employ them as a peculiar kind of dilatational contrivance: thus, Joni used to insert a stick vertically between his lips and so arrayed start the performance of a number of convolutions: dangle about, begin running in various directions, start scratching himself, etc.; but he remained eagerly vigilant all the while lest his lip-extender should by some mishap fall out or become displaced. Roody used to insert a stick in the palm of his hand and never let it go even when frantically running about. 
</para>

<para>
Indeed, any description of <emphasis>stick</emphasis> seemed to fascinate both infants; on finding a stick, Joni would invariably start to use it for digging the ground, banging against the floor, reaching at hitherto unattainable objects or making threatening gestures, Roody used sticks for drawing signs on the, ground, or else liked to throw them over fences. He also employed sticks for chasing dogs and often found amusement in utilizing them for knocking down various objects or making them fly up high into the air. As a matter of fact Roody could never pass a stick without saying: <quote>Nice stick</quote> and used to bring home tremendous amounts of long wooden objects of every imaginable description. When asked why he wanted yet another stick he would always find some new pretext to explain the purport of the latest acquisition. It has already been mentioned that both infants were equally fond of <emphasis>balls</emphasis> and <emphasis>spherical</emphasis> objects. 
</para>

<para>
Much entertainment was similarly derived from toying with <emphasis>transparent objects</emphasis> (coloured glases, medicine bottles, transparent oilcloth, translucent combs). On having acquired some piece of glass Roody and Joni would both in a much similar way press it to their eyes and start looking through it at the sky, next transporting their gaze from one object to another. Now they would look at the sky, then at the ground, in a moment they would dwell upon some garden flowers, only to begin staring at some human face in the very next moment. Both would cherish a tiny morcel of oil-cloth or a stray piece of coloured glass as if these were highly-priced valuables.	
</para>

<para>
Looking through a translucent yellow comb Roody would fervently exclaim; <quote>Oh, how red the sky, oh, how hot!</quote> Putting a piece of yellow oil-cloth to his eye and holding it with one hand Joni would start exci-tedly running about the room; in his progress, on coming across various objects and on seeing them <quote>in a new light</quote> he would invariably tap them with his free hand, as if to ascertain their real nature. Occasionally he would lie flat on his back for quite a long time contemplating the ceiling through the oil-cloth. 
</para>

<para>
<emphasis>Long, pliable or elastic</emphasis> objects, such as rubber hoses, bootlaces and the like, were greatly cherished by both infants. Indeed, the degree of amusement obtained therefrom seemed to exceed the amount of pleasure derived from any manufactured toy. There was no end of different things both little ones would be prone to do with a hose. They would throw it high up into the air intently watching the hose uncoil in its rapid descent, they would wind it round their necks or simply slip it round their shoulders and begin drawing it from side to side; now again, they would insert one end into their mouths and draw-in air through the aperture; or they would take the end of the hose in hand and begin wildly lashing every adjacent object with the other free end. 
</para>

<para>
Ropes, strings and boot-laces were wound up or twisted into loops, offering the new and exhilarating experiment of getting through the loop — a feat which was no sooner thought of than brought into practice. 
</para>

<para>
Great similarity is again observed in the kind of amusement both infants derived from their manipulations with the human hair. On having acquired himself a hair
<footnote><para>
In his desire to get a hair to play with the chimpanzee often went as far as to tear: a human hair from somebody's head.
</para></footnote>
 Joni would indulge in a very peculiar pastime: time and again he would draw the thread through his mouth pressing it tightly to his tongue, but taking the greatest care not to tear it on the way. It seems most astonishing that 13 years later Roody, acting altoget her on his own initiative and in no way stimulated by any outside influence should have also become absorbed in the human hair. The human infant found considerable interest in letting it gently glide between his extended fingers. 
</para>

<para>
Many common traits could again be observed in the <emphasis>destructive games</emphasis> of both infants. Such forms of activity as throwing, tearing and breaking seemed indeed to provide both subjects with a peculiar form of self-contained pleasure. In fact — most playthings used to leave their hands with some or other trace of destructive activity, usually, in the form of tooth imprints or purposeful breakage. 
</para>

<para>
Nearly everyone knows that a child on putting his finger into a hole will try to do his utmost to enlarge the aperture as far as he can, but, with Joni, every contact with an easily-breaking object inevitably ended in the complete desintegration of the item in question. It is also a well-known fact that children's playthings very soon turn into a scattered mess of dilapidated debris; but Joni used to possess the destructive instinct to such an overpowering extent that the range of his devastative activities comprised virtually everything that would come his way without the slightest exception. Joni would spread havoc and wreck everywhere: he would tear wall-paper, gnaw at the walls, break-up the doors of his cage, shatter glasses and tear up all the textile fabrics that were to be found in the room. The destructive tendency in Joni's nature was, indeed, so strong and unyielding that no chastisment would prevent him from tearing pillowcases to tatters, completely breaking-up his cage of performing other similar disorganising actions. Joni's <emphasis>volitional impulses</emphasis> seemed to be at their strongest in the sphere of destructive activity and the less yielding would be the attacked object, the more energy he would spend in his attempts at demolishing it; it even seemed that handicaps stimulated redoubled energy. Indeed, in pursuing his gaol by way of carrying out some prohibited action, or in his endeavours to get at some forbidden object, Joni would display such an amount of energy that no amount of scolding, punishment or even physical pain would prevent him from bringing his plan to completion. Even the danger of picking up a serious quarrel with the observer (of whom he was very fond) never stopped the progress of his destructive activities. Notwithstanding all odds, Joni would stoically, stubbornly and relentlessly forge on towards the realization of his once established aim — the annihilation of the given object. I often had the opportunity of noticing in the case of both infants that a prohibition entailed a responce which was entirely different from that desired. <quote>Forbidden fruit is the sweetest</quote>. The behaviour of both Roody and Joni seems to give ample support to the truth of the saying: prohibited actions were just those to the performance of which both little ones would cling with the greatest steadfastness. 
</para>

<para>
So, on having illicitly got out of his cage in my absence Joni was invariably found to have performed the very thing I had forbidden him to do and to have handled the very objects he knew he was never to touch. The behaviour of the human child shows practically the same tendency towards transgression of rules and opposition at whatever cost. I begin laying swaddles on a chair in the piesence of 10-month-old Roody — he immediately starts tearing them down; I don a hat — the boy tries to remove it; I place a toy on the table — he throws it off; I start a humming top — Roody stops it; I put a ring onto a toy-pyramid — he tries to remove it grunting all the while from the effort exerted; at the age of <cihc_age y="1" m="6" d="0" /> he is forbidden to handle such instruments as spectacles, scissors and knives — no sooner have I turned my back than I find he is toying with the very articles he is told never to touch; he is told not to suck his thumb (age <cihc_age y="2" m="3" d="8" />) — he immediately puts all his hand into his mouth when ordered to discontinue this operation; again (age <cihc_age y="3" m="0" d="11" />) he is cautioned not to choose flower-beds for play — the very next thing he does is just to start trampling flowers; told to shake hands using his right hand — he invariably stretches out his left one, etc. 
</para>

<para>
The intentional actions of both infants are frequently marked with the features of <emphasis>caprice</emphasis> and are carried into effect through sheer stubbornness. Both Roody and Joni would often under in no way altered circumstances suddenly renounce the very claims that had caused a tremendous amount of uproar but a minute ago; or, else, they would display complete indifference on coming into possession of the previously coveted article. Not infrequently it appeared as if the very process of reaching at the desired object and not real necessity were the true motives of their observed behaviour. 
</para>

<para>
<emphasis>Offence</emphasis> was easily taken by both infants when they thought that their supposedly legitimate claims had not been duly complied with: both would in a much similar manner turn their eyes from the offender and refuse to take even the best liked sweetmeats from his hand. 
</para>

<para>
Roody (age <cihc_age y="1" m="4" d="22" />) asks for some object. He is first refused, but sub-sequently permitted to take it (following some afterthought on the part of the adult in question). Now he does not any more want to take it. So, on having once eaten a pear, Roody asked for another. On cutting the fruit into two unequal halves I told him he might have the smaller portion. The boy immediately exclaimed: <quote>You didn't say the big one!</quote> and burst into tears stubbornly refusing to take any part whatever. 
</para>

<para>
In performing prohibited actions both Roody and Joni would try as best they could to be cunning. They would often try to <emphasis>trick</emphasis> or <emphasis>deceive</emphasis> the observer, though their naivity frequenly prevented them from displaying any considerable artfulness. To take a typical example: we forbade Joni to gnaw a certain piece of furniture. In order to achieve his end, the ape hid behind the object in question, turned his back upon us and began gnawing; or, on another occasion, he sought shelter under a pillow trying to make-believe that he was behaving in exactly the right manner — while he was in reality steadily biting at the wood of the taboo table. Sometimes he would cover the desired item of furniture with a piece of paper and start biting through the covering. (He was allowed to tear paper). Roody had received strict commands to the effect that he was never to put matches into his mouth — what does he do but hide behind an old armchair and perform the prohibited trick firmly believing himself to be well protected from every inquisitive glance. 
</para>

<para>
When walking in the garden with his grandmother, Roody was given due notice to the effect that he was not 1o pick berries; immediately instead of proceeding ahead of her as was his usual wont, Roody (age <cihc_age y="2" m="3" d="13" />) declared that he was going to follow; his grandmother looking back perceived him right in the middle of the prohibited act of picking berries. 
</para>

<para>
On wishing to get a cracker and evidently doubtful as to whether he would actually get it, Roody says to his grandmother: <quote>Grand ma' don't follow me, for goodness sake don't follow me!</quote> Whereupon he goes to the summerhouse, closes the door and takes a cracker. 
</para>

<para>
I forbid Joni to get out of his cage in my absence and he knows very well that he must not destroy the stucco on the ceiling. On leaving the room I say to him: <quote>Stay here and do not go anywhere</quote> (the cage remaining unlocked). But I have only to leave the room when Joni gets out of his cage, shuts the door of the room (which I left half-open), climbs up to the ceiling and starts picking the stucco whereupon he indulges in some kind of play <emphasis>outside</emphasis> his cage. On hearing my retur-ning footsteps he immediately returns to his place, pretending that nothing at all had happened and utterly unaware of the fact that his stucco-besmeared nose as well as a pool of urine on the floor unequivocally testify to his disobedience. 
</para>

<para>
The behaviour of both infants often resembles what may be termed <quote>ostrich-policy</quote>. Thus, Joni grasping some objects which he knows he ought not to touch fixedly looks at the observer never once detracting his gaze towards the coveted object. More than that: he seeks and finds ultimately the desired article solely through the sense of touch without even once looking at it and apparently believing that if he him-self does not see it, neither will others. Such little tricks were even yet more naive and comical with the boy. Thus Roody (age <cihc_age y="2" m="2" d="6" />) was once manifestly unwilling to take his milk. I say: <quote>Drink</quote>. He hides his hands behind his back and retorts <quote>I ain't got no hands</quote> and <quote>I'm afraid of the milk</quote>. I insist upon getting a definite answer, whether he is going to take his milk or not. He does not breathe a word, seemingly afraid to say <quote>no</quote> and unwilling to say <quote>yes</quote>. I insist further: <quote>Why don't you answer?</quote> He says: <quote>Yes — don't answer</quote>. I: <quote>Why?</quote> He: <quote>I ain't got a tongue</quote>.
</para>

<para>
On another occasion when asked to shake hands he retorts: <quote>Don't hear</quote>. When told to water flowers (an occupation for which he apparently cared but little) he replies (age <cihc_age y="2" m="2" d="3" />) <quote>Don't see</quote>.
</para>

<para>
Similar <quote>ostrich policy</quote> could also be observed in the way Roody used to play at <quote>hide and seek</quote>. Thus, he could be often observed to conceal himself behind a small chair which but very incompletely hid his figure. As to his head, he would veil that with a thick shawl, apparently believing that nobody could see him if he himself did not perceive his playmates. Or, sometimes, he would squat on the steps of the balcony shutting his eyes with his hands and turning his back to the seeker, evidently fully convinced that his artful cunning had completely locked him out of the world of visual perception. 
</para>

<para>
The manifestations of <emphasis>guilty</emphasis> feeling could be plainly observed in the behaviour of both infants, but they appeared to be somewhat different in either case. On seeing that he had committed some evil doing Joni would try to avoid the glance of the observar and stoically submit to censure, punishment or any angry words of reprimand. He apparently felt he deserved the punishment. At the same time Roody when censured would flush, stick out his lips and be ready to cry. Even the slightest smacking immediately caused an outburst of tears. 
</para>

<para>
Both Roody and Joni were highly mobile — and this not only physi-cally but also <emphasis>mentally</emphasis>. It would often seem that their tempestuous growth unceasingly stimulated them towards ever more buoyant activity. In whatever position or in whichsoever surroundings they might happen to be — eating, dressing, washing, even sitting on the baby-chair — unceasingly, relentlessly, they would be inventing ever new forms of amusement or entertainment. If awake and in the possession of any objects which they might use as playthings, they would constantly leap from one thing to another in perpetual search of ever new instrumentalities for amusement, — often only to return to the original source of amusement within the very next minute. 
</para>

<para>
But the free-play-activity of the two infants reveals not only <emphasis>lack of concentrated attention</emphasis>. There is yet another and perhaps even more characteristic trait — <emphasis>curiosity</emphasis> which found its principal expression in the fact that both subjects were invariably attracted by everything new, whatever it might happen to be — new people, things, or surroundings. The demonstration of some novel object would for instance always be an entirely sufficient stimulus for interrupting every kind of playful activity, or even for cutting short any particular emotion that might happen to be sensed at the given moment. Roody's tendency towards <emphasis>the new</emphasis> was well typified by his once exclaiming during a long walk: <quote>I'd like to go on without end if I could only always see new things!</quote> All Joni's behaviour corroborates the opinion that he was endowed with the same disposition. In the absence of new impressions Joni would clearly show that he felt dull: he would lie flat on his back indifferently gazing ahead of him or he would start picking his teeth and making a cracking noise with his lips. Roody would often approach me with the following request: <quote>Now, do show me something new!</quote> Both subjects would invariably give signs of most manifest joy every time they experienced new sensations. Each more or less unusual visual perception seemed to have a stimulating effect: new houses, a wood, street incidents, any novel developments in the life of the court-yard — all these and many other stimuli would cause Roody's or Joni's wondering gaze to transfix the intriguing phenomenon, their close scrutiny never being interrupted be it even for a single moment. Their curiosity would become particularly keen in course of driving in a motor car, but no less interest would be exhibited in course of simplywalking about town, when both Roody and Joni, each on his part, would invariably try and look into the windows of basement flats. Especial interest was attached to the contents of wardrobes, baskets and cupboards: both infants, whenever they possibly could, would show equal zeal in trying to get inhide and find some new non-descript item which they would next start at length contemplating. All semi-open apertures seemed especially tantalizing. Under this head came: stoves, dampers, pockets, various receptacles, human nostrils, ears, etc. The searching eye or the exploring finger would always try to penetrate the orifice; indeed there seemed to be not a single nook or recess in the whole premise which Roody and Joni had not tactually or visually explored at some moment or other. In such investigatory behaviour tactual exploration usually took the lead, and in this respect Roody was in no way behind Joni — they both seemed to consider it but a poor inquest if the curious object had not been properly handled or tasted with the tongue. <emphasis>Convex</emphasis> and <emphasis>concave</emphasis> objects commanded an equal degree of curiosity, manual exploration being nearly exclusively resorted to when protruding or depressed shapes were being investigated. 
</para>

<para>
Both infants were often subject to <emphasis>erroneous visual perceptions</emphasis>. Thus, on seeing three-dimensional objects represented in the pictures of a book, Roody and Joni frequently attempted to catch hold of them. In his unsuccessful attempts to <quote>remove</quote> the object in question Joni would even tear the pages, while Roody upon seeing that all his en-deavours were conspicuously to no avail disappointedly exclaimed <quote>By no means!</quote> meaning that he could by no means take the thing (age <cihc_age y="2" m="0" d="23" />). 
</para>

<para>
It is but natural that <emphasis>lustrous, bright or rapidly moving</emphasis> objects should stimulate the curiousity of both subjects to the greatest extent. On seeing articles of such description both would display very much similar behaviour: thus, upon first beholding the interesting item they would open wide their mouths, then draw out their lips and lastly start exploring the texture of the substance with the help of the index finger. 
</para>

<para>
Both enjoyed looking at picture-books and in their eagerness to get at always new impressions would rapidly turn page after page. Both would differentiate between pictures. Joni used to overlook some pictures while he would always intently gaze at others (notably pictures representing carnivorous wild animals with blazing eyes; or else monkeys); Roody (age <cihc_age y="2" m="1" d="6" />) on seeing two pictures representing one a small bird and the other a big one, exclaimed <quote>Nice!</quote> with reference to the small bird and began kissing the respective picture, and then turning to the other picture of the big bird said: <quote>Nasty!</quote>
</para>

<para>When fingering a calendar he used to call the red letter days — <quote>Good</quote> and the others <quote>bad</quote> (age <cihc_age y="2" m="1" d="25" />). </para>

<para>
The investigating curiosity of both infants was often directed towards the facial features of human adults or towards their own bodies. All of a sudden Joni starts intently gazing at someone from the household. Though he knows the person in question very well, he starts surveying his facial features as if he sees them for the first time. He passes his finger over the eyes, feels the nose and ears, introduces his index finger into nostrils, mouth or ear and pays especial attention to the mouth cavity. If the human subject under investigation happens to open his mouth or does so on purpose to comply with the inquisitive desires of the ape, Joni will smile at every movement of the mouth. He also takes much pleasure in feeling the human hair, touching spectacles, rings or brooches. Exactly similar behaviour was observed with Roody. 
</para>

<para>
Both infants frequently indulged in self-examination. Every morning Joni would meticulously examine every part of his body and on finding any actual or imaginary defect (scratches, specks of dirt or soiled places) would immediately start to groom himself, licking up sore places, removing dirt, etc. Roody at the age of one would examine his naked body with no less keen interest. He would also often start feeling his navel, fingering a casual pimple or any other intriguing spot, etc. 
</para>

<para>
The reactions of both infants to the <emphasis>mirror image</emphasis> have been observed to be strikingly similar.
The following consecutive mirror reactions have been found to coincide completely, viz: 
</para>

<para>
1) spying own image in mirror and smiling;
</para>
<para>
2) touching image;
</para>
<para>
3) touching image with hand and seeking for something behind loo-
</para>
<para>
4) king glass;	
</para>
<para>
5) spitting into image;
</para>
<para>
6) making rattling noise with lips, grimaces, gesticulation;
</para>
<para>
7) agrgessive lifting of hand and tools at image and hitting it. 
</para>

<para>
In their examination of surrounding objects both infants revealed exceedingly keen powers of <emphasis>observation</emphasis>. Both Roody and Joni immediately recognized any new object within the range of their perception and at once started scrutinizing it. Their searchful eye, fixed on the observer or some other well known human immediately discovered any new dress, article of footwear, scratch, pimple, or ink-spot; neither did even the smallest change in the usual order of the room escape their attention. They invariably perceived such minute objects as specks of dirt on the floor, spots on the wallpaper, stray pins, needles, casually dropped nails, all minikin articles of the latter description being invariably scrutinized, felt and, if possible, collected and acquired. 
</para>

<para>
Roody (age <cihc_age y="2" m="1" d="24" />) immediately notices a tiny piece of hair sticking to a loaf of bread and exclaims <quote>Hairlet!</quote> eagerly removing it before he proceeds to eat. When offered stewed fruit he discovers a tiny worm and refuses to partake of this otherwise highly palatable dish. After the rehanging of some pictures in the nursery, he immediately notices thechange and enquires: <quote>Why this picture? This not here</quote> — showing with his little finger the erstwhile location of the newly-hung pictures. 
</para>

<para>
But both infants not only perceive <emphasis>newness</emphasis>: they also readily discern <emphasis>similarity</emphasis>. In following the chimpanzee's free-play activity we more than once had occasion to see Joni make matching colour-groups out of 35 variegated plates
<footnote><para>
This process was described at length in my book <quote>Poznavatelnye Sposobnosti Shimpanzee</quote>, State Publishing Department of the USSR, 1924. <emphasis role="bold">N. Kohts</emphasis> Untersuchungen uber die Erkenntnisfahigkeiten des Schimpansen, Moskau. Zoopsycholgisches Laboratorium des Museum Darwiniarum. 1924.
</para></footnote>
 of 7 different colours. Of all different hues Joni seemed to prefer <emphasis>light blue</emphasis> and he would often select a number of so coloured plates for his playful activities. At other times I noticed that Joni while manipulating a set of different-sized plates, would persistently select the <emphasis>small</emphasis> and <emphasis>round</emphasis> patterns; when manipulating a series of cards comprising sticks, acorns and plates of various description (square and round, small and big) he selected all the cards of one colour and put them aside into a separate group. The tendency towards the assimilation of such objects that possessed some one characteristic property in common was also strongly marked with Roody. At the age of one he used (on his own initiative) to first point to his own ear or eye and then direct his index finger towards the same facial features of some adult in the room. Once, after pointing to the legs of a horse in a picture he showed his own legs, thus clearly indicating that he was fully capable of assimilating like features. At the age of two (to be precise: <cihc_age y="2" m="1" d="15" />) Roody once looked at his doll, pointed to her eyebrows, said <quote>brows-brows</quote> then looked in turn at all the members of the family and exclaimed <quote>Mother-brows, uncle-brows, daddy-brows</quote> after which he quite unexpectedly put out <quote>milk-brows</quote>. At the same time he pointed to a black rim on a white milk-cup apparently implying that this was also a kind of eyebrows. 
</para>

<para>
Both infants show evidence of possessing <emphasis>generalized</emphasis> notions which in Joni's case is expressed by the substitution of some more or less suitable contrivance for the needed instrument. Thus, he replaced sticks by pencils; ink by syrup, water, urine or milk, a hammer by a stone or his own fist; a serviette or pocket handkerchief — by a piece of paper. Joni had apparently a generalized notion of key and padlock since he was apt to apply any key to any description of keyhole located at most different places (doors, suitcases, etc.). 
</para>

<para>
Roody, when aged 10 months, had already mastered the generalized notion of <quote>button</quote> and when asked <quote>Where is the button?</quote> would inva-riably point to various buttons attached to most different places and widely differing with respect to colour, size, material and shape. 
</para>

<para>
These and similar facts point to both infants possesing the faculty of elementary abstraction and also show that they were endowed with acomparatively well developed memory. The latter circumstance stands out with particular relief when <emphasis>conditional reflexes</emphasis> are taken stock of. 
</para>

<para>
Both the human and the anthropoid infant easily form motor habits, no particular training being required for the purpose. Their motor habits are principally associated with self-help behaviour, such as is expressed in drinking from cup, using spoon, knife, serviette, blanket and other table or household implements. 
</para>

<para>
Both infants sometimes show a nearly similar gesture language. Thus <quote>request</quote> is expressed by extending hand forward, <quote>rejection of food</quote> by turning face and head aside, <quote>thirst</quote> by putting hand to mouth, <quote>desire to draw attention to oneself</quote> by tugging at dress. 
</para>

<para>
From among other types of conditional reflexes the following have been ascertained: 
</para>

<formalpara>
<title>1) Visual-taste-motor e. g.</title>: when shown well-known sweat-meats such as oranges, both infants run-up to the coveted object and grasp it.
</formalpara>

<formalpara>
<title>2) Visual-pain-motor e. g.</title> when scalded by fire, or hot stove both infants immediately withdraw from the offending object
<footnote><para>
Observed with Roody as early as at the age of 5 months.
</para></footnote>
.
</formalpara>

<formalpara>
<title>3) Auricular-motor:</title> Both respond by complying to such orders as <quote>sit down</quote>, <quote>lie dow</quote>, <quote>give hand</quote>
<footnote><para>
Observed with Roody at the age of 8-9 months.
</para></footnote>
. 
</formalpara>

<formalpara>
<title>4) Auricular-visual-motor:</title> on hearing the word <quote>fly</quote> Joni looks round and seeks for fly. When asked <quote>Where tick-tack?</quote> — Roody turns head, looks for clock, finds it, stares at it
<footnote><para>
Observed with Roody at the age of 7 months.
</para></footnote>
. 
</formalpara>

<formalpara>
<title>5) Visual-motor:</title> Observer gathers books — sign of forthcoming withdrawal from room — Joni runs up to door and bars it, preventing egress; Roody, when crossing slreet, sees motor-bus and stops, formerly having to be held back by the hand under similar circumstances. 
</formalpara>

<formalpara>
<title>6) Visual-emotional-sound:</title> upon observer entering room with books — sign of prolonged sojourn — Joni excitedly and joyfully grunts; on observer gathering books — begins to cry. On seeing me enter his room in home-dress. Roody loudly laughs; on seeing me in overcoat — cries. 
</formalpara>

<formalpara>
<title>7) Auricular-emotional-sound:</title> Sound of ascending elevator-bell — i. e. signal of arrival — Joni excitedly and joyfully grunts; sound of ascending elevator — subsequent silence —  sign of observer not having come home — Joni cries. Roody is told: <quote>Let us go for a walk</quote>. Kisses hand, joyfully whipmers; when told: <quote>Let us go to park</quote> — looks sad, even ready to weep, since does not like to go there. 
</formalpara>

<para>
In respect of ejaculation of natural sounds we find both infants topossess the following similar vocalizations: <quote>Ee</quote>; <quote>Oo-aw</quote>
<footnote><para>
Noticed with Roody at age of  <cihc_age y="0" m="0" d="1" />.
</para></footnote>
; <quote>Um</quote>
<footnote ><para>
Noticed with Roody at age of  <cihc_age y="0" m="0" d="5" />.
</para></footnote>
; <quote>Kh-r-yu-oo</quote>
<footnote><para>
Noticed with Roody at age of <cihc_age y="0" m="1" d="27" />.
</para></footnote>
; <quote>Oo-hoo</quote>
<footnote><para>
Noticed with Roody at age of  <cihc_age y="0" m="2" d="3" />.
</para></footnote>
; <quote>Oh</quote>
<footnote><para>
Noticed with Roody at age of  <cihc_age y="0" m="3" d="32" />.
</para></footnote>
; <quote>You</quote>
<footnote><para>
Noticed with Roody at age of  <cihc_age y="0" m="6" d="30" />.
</para></footnote>
. Both infants also possess much similar vocalizations of panting, sneezing, coughing, grunting, snorting, deep yawning and partly also crying
<footnote><para>
The last 7 sounds listed in decreasing order of similarity.
</para></footnote>
.
</para>

<para>
As regards imitative sounds but few can be produced here as being possessed by the two subjects in common, yet both (though with diffe-ring skill) were able to imitate a dog's bark The better accomplishment certaintly belonged to Joni, which is not to be wondered at since the bark was his natural sound. 
</para>

<para>Both infants reproduce such sounds as the stamping of feet, banging of hand, lip-cracking. </para>

&liniya;

<para>With such material it would seem that the similarity between the infant chimpanzee and the human child is in many respects doubtless, strikingly-great and many-sided. </para>

<para>
But if we deepen our analysis and bring the behaviour of the two subjects into yet greater relief basing ourselves on the full range of our observational evidence, we shall certainly be as likely as not to discern other features which clearly testify to <emphasis>dissimilarity</emphasis> and <emphasis>divergence</emphasis>. 
</para>

<para>
Speaking in first place about the <emphasis>sitting postures</emphasis> of ape and man, we must say that in the foregoing treatment we principally had in view sitting postures of an artificial or non typical character (on a bench or other elevation, sitting on knees of observer); but the typical or natu-ral sitting posture of the chimpanzee which can be seen from a number of our photographs is altogether different: it consists in the ape sitting on his rump with legs bent and closely adhering to body, the trunk being firmly supported upon downcast arms. Now, this very posture seems to be entirely unnatural to the human infant and may only be observed with the five-month old baby when he is learning to sit. On the other hand, I never had occasion to observe with the chimpanzee that very usual infantile sitting posture which consists in squatting or sitting down on heels. 
</para>

<para><emphasis>Standing</emphasis> postures may be said to be quite as dissimilar. </para>

<para>
True, the chimpanzee — just as the human child — is capable of stan-ding vertically erect, but when he does so, in order to keep up his equilibruim, he always leans against one side of the sole or at least upon one of his feet. Moreover he is in the custom of standing with legs wide apart and even then lacks the necessary stability. The standing posture, is only retained for a short interval of time and even then the ape is prone to seek for some suitable support with his hand lest he should lose his balance. At such a moment the chimpanzee closely resembles the human child when learning to stand, who, while clinging fast to some handhold, will also set his legs somewhat akimbo and fall down to one side of his foot a little. After all has been said — the typical posture of the chimpanzee is: standing on all fours wit'i axis of body slightly inclined and it is only in this manner that he can manage to stand for indefinitely long periods of time. At the same time the typical way in which the three year old human will stand is vertically erect with legs brought tightly together, his only support being the full spread o his foot. 
</para>

<para>
But the <emphasis>erect walking</emphasis> of the chimpanzee arouses yet greater doubts. On the whole it is possible to speak about this mode of the ape's loco-motion but in somewhat conventional manner: the infant chimpanzee is able to walk upright no more than three or four steps at a time and at that he constantly balances his arms to keep up equilibrium. The chimpanzee will only then adopt the vertical way of walking when he wants to survey his immediate neighbourhood or if he is in need of finding his bearings in a new or seemingly dangerous locality. His clumsy gait proceeds but with difficulty and he is at any moment likely to abandon it in favour of more familiar modes of locomotion such as walking or running on all fours (with slightly inclined body). When thus proceeding ahead the infant chimpanzee will in his rapid and resilient gait not only by far overtake a human child of the same age but will even surpass an adult. 
</para>

<para>
I was never able to observe any real <quote>all four</quote> locomotion with regard to my own child. Even when crawling (age 8—9 months) he would always find support in the palms of his hands and in his knees. Never would he lean upon the sole of his foot or find support in bent fingers as is the case with the chimpanzee. 
</para>

<para>
In order to facilitate locomotion, the chimpanzee will every now and then put his hands to the ground even when led by the hand. And, if in observing the gait of a 9-or 11-month-old child we can still see some balancing of arms together with a slightly inclined posture, the 3-year infant is almost invariably found to freely walk about in an altogether upright posture, his erect locomotion lasting uninterruptedly from 1&half; to 2 hours without involving any lassitude. 
</para>

<para>
The fact that the human child altogether ceases to utilize his arms in course of locomotion permits him to carry various objects, which he freely bears, drags or brandishes about at will when walking or run-ning. But, when the chimpanzee wishes to take hold of something, he usually prefers to carry the object in his mouth or else drag it along with the help of his foot. 
</para>

<para>
Mention was already made of the <emphasis>climbing activities</emphasis> of both infants. It is perhaps in the manner and in the perfection of climbing up-stairs or up trees that we can trace the greatest dissimilarity of all-While Joni always ascended stairs on all fours and got down in exactly the same manner (head downwards), Roody became capable of descending a staircase or climbing down from an armchair in this way only at the age of 1&half; to 2 years, the descent being by the way nearly always accomplished <emphasis>legs forward</emphasis>. But, when arrived at the age of three, the human child was already fully capable of getting upstairs fully erect without there being any need for bringing his hands into play. On the other hand, the human child aged from 3 to 5 finds the greatest difficulty in climbing up a small tree and can hardly hold to the branches with his weak little hands. When sitting on the branch of a tree his face will be seen to betray a pitiful grimace and he seems at every minute to be in the danger of helplessly tumbling down to the ground. In direct contrast to this, the infant chimpanzee will dexterously, assuredly and easily climb aloft using both hands and legs and will not only reach to the tops of trees but sometimes even climb over steeply inclined roofs and bravely perch himself on the very ridge. The descent involves no greater handicap than the upward movement. The little animal will in some time even make so bold as to climb down columns and nearly perpendicular inclines leaving far behind even the most skilled human stunt-performer. 
</para>

<para>
The chimpanzee's foot as compared with the respective human organ not only possesses much greater flexibility, but is also characterized by far larger mobility in the pelvis joint: thus Joni was able to throw his leg so high up that it practically formed an obtuse angle with the other leg. Such a feat was entirely beyond Roody's capabilities, being, as is well known, only accomplished by specially trained professional stunters. 
</para>

<para>
<quote>Jumping with joy</quote> without moving from the spot is a trait common to both infants; but it is only the human child who can jump on one foot while the chimpanzee has been frequently observed to leap from his legs to his hands and vice versa. 
</para>

<para>
Let us now turn to divergency in behaviour — a phase which makes itself particularly manifest in the <emphasis>instinct of self-support and self-help</emphasis>. While the human child is prone to perform all the acts pertaining to daily routine (such as eating, drinking, dressing, washing, combing, etc.) with the greatest precipitancy as if wanting to get rid of them as soon as just only possible, the infant chimpanzee indulges in such processes as eating, drinking, grooming and so on with a most wonderful degree of preoccupation, attention and minuteness. 
</para>

<para>
Prior to swallowing a piece of food — even of a kind he was most used to take — Joni would invariably smell it, bite off some small morsel as if to taste it and would only then begin slowly eating the food, finding particular relish in his favourite tid-bits. When offered some milk with a temperature below that to which he was accustomed, Joni used to refuse drinking it, or else he would start slowly rinsing it in his mouth till the temperature would be brought to the desired point and he could at last feel himself in a position to swallow up the liquid. 
</para>

<para>Joni would never swallow hard extraneous objects (such as the ker-nels of fruits, etc.), which fact was oftentimes to be observed in the case of Roody. </para>

<para>
The ape thoroughly disliked the admixture of butter-fat or meat (espe-cially chicken-meat) to his food, but would apparently find insects to be quite palatable, occasionally eating up even the flees he had caught on his own body. In contradistinction to Joni, Roody thoroughly enjoyed butter and meat, but was so squeamish with regard to insects that he would never even taste of any food into which some smal fly or worm had by some ill chance found its way. In course of eating some particularly high-prized dainty Joni would loudly grunt, the grunt occasionally passing into a deep short cough. Under similar circumstances Roody used to deliver a specific grumbling sound, much resembling the ejaculations of a suckling bear's cub. 
</para>

<para>
While the human child in starting upon the various activities connected with the round of his daily routine would definitely dislike any inter-vention on the part of adults eagerly shouting <quote>Out!</quote>, <quote>Let me alone!</quote> or <quote>Myself, myself, myself!</quote> and would display a well-marked desire towards acquiring an independent and self-taught command of such every-day contrivances as cup, spoon, towel, clothing, etc., the chim-panzee was by no means averse to receiving assistance and displayed no tendency whatever towards finding a clue through his own inde-pendent activity. It was but clumsily and reluctantly that Joni would drink from either cup or saucer and in proceeding to his meals he fre-quently used to hold the vessel not only with his hand but also with his foot. 
</para>

<para>It goes without saying that Roody's dexterity in this respect by far superceded what could be qualified as Joni's acquired motor habits. </para>

<para>
Elsewhere, we have already mentioned the dislike of both infants towards sharing their food with anybody else, but here we must make a reservation and say that, while Joni altogether refused to give anybody anything (be it even the person to whom he otherwise showed the greatest affection), Roody, on hearing a vocal request to that effect, would generally apportion some small bit to the asker, and occasionally he would even go so far as to give a whole piece if he happened to be in the possesion of two. And — notwithstanding this — the fact stands out that Joni, in contrast to Roody, always displayed a tremendous degree of spendthriftiness and would constantly throw about or otherwise waste a tremendous amount of edible material while partaking of his food. 
</para>

<para>
In the process of catering for his bodily wants, the chimpanzee not only indulges in self-examination and cleaning, but also takes care to doctor any of his minor afflictions. He will readily remove a splint, lick up a wound or begin besmearing it with his saliva. Sometimes, notwith-standing all the pain caused by the operation, he will start sucking the blood out of a wound shuddering all the while at the aching sensation he is inflicting upon himself. The human child, on the other hand, when seeing blood or if getting a splint into his finger, becomes frightened and immediately resorts to the assistance of some adult, being seemingly afraid of as much as touching the painful spot himself. Similarly, while Joni would readily submit to any kind of doctoring administered by the observer, Roody not unfrequently attempted to counteract similar manipulations or else submitted to them only with bitter tears. 
</para>

<para>Close observation of the manner in which both infants prepare for going to sleep again points to considerable dissimilarity. </para>

<para>
The ape is definitely in the habit of preparing suitable accomodation with his own hands. He likes to make his sleeping quarters as soft and cosy as possible and will start fidgeting about with his bedclothes till he at last manages to arrange himself something of a nest. He will never be satisfied with even the most carefully made bed and invariably tries to change its arrangement in accordance with his wont: thus, softer covers are usually distributed along the periphery of the prospective lying place, while some elevation is always provided for the head. Quite in opposite to the ape, the human child makes use of his bed, revealing no particular tendency to rearrange it in accordance with his taste. It is worth noting that while Roody invariably enjoyed being tucked up to the neck and would even then occasionally (despite remonstrances) make a <quote>dive</quote> under the blanket, Joni never (not even in the cold season) permitted his bedclothes to reach higher than the waist, offering definite resistance when attempts were made to bring the blanket to some higher point. 
</para>

<para>When asleep, Roody would frequently start talking, gesticulating, or crying but we never had occasion to observe anything of the like with Joni. </para>

<para>
We might venture the suggestion that Joni's opposition to having his arms covered up was dictated by an instinctive desire to keep the upper members of his body free for defence in the emergency of an attack made at the moment of his greatest defencelessness. Such an inference seems to be corroborated by the fact Joni was definitely antagonistic to wearing any garments of whatsoever description, be it even the lightest jerseys. No less reluctance was revealed when attempts were made to tie compresses round his neck. Even the light dressing of a cut finger would be most energetically counteracted — a fact never to be observed in the case of Roody. 
</para>

<para>
Roody seemed to have a definite desire towards mastering the art of unaided dressing and deliberately though slowly progressed in his skill. Joni refused using any kind of clothing except a blanket. 
</para>

<para>We may also surmise in this connection that the instinct of <emphasis>liberty</emphasis> is much more strongly developed in the anthropoid infant. </para>

<para>
It seems characteristic that when allowed abroad, Roody would start running far and wide, while Joni had an apparently insatiable desire for negotiating great altitudes. Up he would go at any cost and could soon be seen loftily perched upon some neighbouring roof where he would sometimes spend as much as several hours at a stretch. (It is perhaps worth noting that his stomach and bladder voidings were always preceded by climbing aloft). 
</para>

<para>
Privation of liberty was much more acutely sensed by Joni than by Roody, which may possibly be accounted for by the fact that the ape, when confined, would generally be locked up in his cage while the child almost always remained within human environment. 
</para>

<para>
Again, there is a marked divergence in the <emphasis>attack and defence</emphasis> instincts. It may even be claimed that there is in this connection a great difference not only in the outside signs of fear but also in the provoking stimuli. 
</para>

<para>
While Roody, when frightened, would slightly flush and draw his hands to his chest, Joni used, on the contrary, to grow pale, all bristle up and make something of a safeguarding gesture with his hand, usually bringing it to the eyes as if to protect them from an eventual assault. When in the state of a fear tantrum (caused by such stimuli as a fire-shot, a loud discharge or a magnesium flashlight) Joni would fall prone upon the ground head foremost and hands crossed above head. It is perhaps needless to say that such tantrums were often accompanied by violent defecation. 
</para>

<para>
I never noticed Roody to become frightened on hearing loud light or sound stimuli, but Joni was invariably quite terrorized under such cir-cumstances. Joni was particularly afraid of reptiles (even of tiniest turtles and grass-snakes) and furs (particular fright was evoked by the spotted skin of a panther). Olfactory stimuli left Roody on the whole indifferent, while they definitely caused fear responses with the infant ape. In general, it seems possible to say that Joni became much more frightened than Roody; all the more wonderful then that Joni could quite spontaneously overcome his fears with much greater rapidity than was the case with Roody; accordingly, the ape could on the whole be said to be braver than the boy. 
</para>

<para>
To further illustrate this point I may say that I had several times occasion to observe that Joni, after first coming across some intimidating experience, would, on his own initiative, arrange for a second encounter with the fear-inspiring stimulus, in result of which he gained better cognisance of the former bugaboo and was already in a full position to completely overcome his original scare. Roody, when frightened, would seek for the companionship of some grown-up and would overmaster his terror only in result of receiving either encouragement or assistance on the part of the protecting adult. 
</para>

<para>
Joni was certainly more capable of self-protection than Roody. The alarmed chimpanzee could often be seen in a threatening posture with hair all bristled up and looking nearly double his normal size. Standing on all fours, he would intently stare at the fright-causing stimulus. Every now and then he would make a little jump from one foot to the other as if ready to assail the enemy and would indeed leap at the offending stimulus at the critical moment. In doing so, he could be seen to stand up erect, show his teeth, turn down his upper lip and make a kind of clamouring noise. At last he would seize the victim with his teeth and start tearing and worrying it. If prevented to do so, his paroxism of helpless rage would sometimes go as far as to cause him to start biting his own body. 
</para>

<para>
It seems hardly necessary to say that Roody never displayed anything like Joni's tantrums when stimulated by the same <quote>intimidating</quote> objects (stuffed animals, skins). When in the state of anger Roody would fre-quently clench the fists of his hands, while Joni would do the same with his feet. 
</para>

<para>
It seems also worth mentioning that one of Joni's greatest fits of rage was observed when he was shown the stuffed specimen of a small chimpanzee (6 months old), while a similar object shown to Roody (age 2&half; years) 13 years later seemed to evoke the boy's most tender feelings. Acting altogether on his own initiative, he began hugging the stuffed animal saying <quote>Poor little Joni</quote>.
</para>

<para>
Roody generally had not even a trace of that cruel hateful or scornful attitude to small animals which was so characteristic for Joni. It was, in fact, one of the apparent pleasures of Joni to torture, worry or even kill various small and harmless living beings such as frogs, crawfishes, beetles, cockroaches, etc. 
</para>

<para>
Contrariwise, Roody apparently possessed a feeling of particular tenderness towards animals. Whenever some small beast got into trouble he would invariably try to render it all the possible assistance he could. Thus, he would try to extricate flies from tangle-foot paper and would shed bitter tears on seeing the insects flutter with their wings in helpless attempts to disengage themselves. He would also cry with compassion on seeing ill-treated dogs and make all kind of attempts to protect them. On seeing a bleeding animal he would try to heel its wounds and was most emphatically opposed to the catching of mice in traps. When coming acrosssmaller children he always tried to render them whatever services were within his power
<footnote><para>
Both infants had been placed in practically similar environmental conditions. Any kind of ill-treatment with respect to smaller animals was strictly forbidden and efforts were made towards encouraging feelings of sympa'hy and compassion. Yet, our endeavours in this respect met with any degree of success only in the case of Roody, whilst they may be said to have been completely frustrated as regards Joni. All evidence points to the fact that whatever pedagogical devices might have been used with Joni, they would invariably have proved futile, no possibilities being apparently available for making the ape show any degree of sympathy towards lower forms of animals.
</para></footnote>
.
</para>

<para>
Elsewhere we have already briefly dwelt upon the feelings of affection and sympathy which both subjects displayed towards their adult protector. But it should be pointed out here that only Roody wept with compassion on seeing his adult friends show signs of sickness or other bodily suffering. At the same time it seems characteristic, that the writer had never occasion te see the ape relinquish his egocentric tendencies or make any attempt towards sharing his welfare with somebody else. Thus, Joni would never — and not even when entreated to do so — give up be it the slightest morcel of his food; true, he would sometimes act in protection of his human friends, but would immediately retreat if he felt he was in real danger himself, leaving his companion to extricate himself out of the difficulty as best he could. Thus, when some object causing considerable fear to Joni was brought up, or in case of a pseudo-attack on the part of some person of whom Joni was afraid, the chimpanzee cared only about escaping peril himself. 
</para>

<para>
On the other hand, Roody seemed to experience particularly strong revengeful and wrathful feelings on such special occasions when he would, for instance be trying to save small animals from the attack of larger ones. Thus, on seeing a big dog fight a smaller one, he would do all he could to tear-up the pack, and in his efforts to save the <quote>under-dog</quote> he would even go as far as to entirely forget all personal danger. More than once we had occasion to see the boy discontinue some kind of clamorous amusement at the slightest hint of somebody being unwell in the house. Once he refused point blank to eat a piece of marmelade with the imprint of a hare, stating that he was sorry for the <quote>little hare</quote> and <quote>that he could not eat him up</quote>. All our attempts at proving to him <quote>that this was not a real hare</quote> led to no results and he stubbornly refused eating the tid-bit though it belonged to a preferred variety and despite there being no other sweets in view. 
</para>

<para>
As early as at the age of three the child's behaviour already points to spontaneous manifestations of such feelings as ethics, altruism, sense of justice and grasping what is right and what is wrong. But there does not seem to be even the slightest hint in this direction on the part of the chimpanzee. The utmost that I had occasion to observe in this respect with Joni was a case of inhibited anger when I once happened to cause him Pain in treating his nose with ointment. Joni caught my hand in his mouth, but let it go at the last moment without biting. 
</para>

<para>
The affectionate behaviour of both infants is again marked with a tremendous difference in the strength of the feeling. Roody had chara-cteristic forms of utterance in which he used to express his affection: <quote>Dear mother — love</quote>, <quote>I don't want to give you up to anybody</quote>, <quote>I want always to be with mother, day, evening and night</quote>, <quote>I do love mother, every day do I love my mother</quote>. The child wants to be in complete and everlasting possession of his beloved ones. Thus, he asks: <quote>Mother, will you ever die?</quote> and getting no answer expresses his own secret desire, saying: <quote>I'dlike mother to never die</quote>!
</para>

<para>
In our, observations of other phases of <emphasis>social behaviour</emphasis> we must first point to Joni much more rapidly establishing contact with human adults than Roody; it may also be said that his relations with a newco-mer were to a much greater extent tinged with familiarity or something of the <quote>hail-fellow-well-met</quote> attitude; but in his playful behaviour Joni invariably tended towards a commanding role and would always show a definite unwillingness to <emphasis>submit</emphasis>. The smaller and the more defenceless Joni's playmates — the more commandeering, despotic and even tormenting he would grow. 
</para>

<para>
The social behaviour of the human child as featured in his playful activities is radically different: he readily acquiesces to adult leadership and gladly performs any assignment he may happen to be given. The companionship of his equals causes him to display something of a brotherly fellowship while the society of younger children, animals or toys evokes a kind of fatherly or protective attitude. 
</para>

<para>
We may now revert to the question of <emphasis>emotional manifestation</emphasis>. In the preceding treatment of our subject we mentioned some basic similarities in the principal emotions (fright, sorrow, excitement, joy, anger, disgust, curiosity, astonishment, tender behaviour) as well as the similarity of many of the corressponding stimuli. Now, in order to throw our comparative study into still bolder relief we must point to yet another feature viz. the <emphasis>manifestation of emotions as expressed in mimics, pantomime and vocalization</emphasis> which is incomparably more pronounced and accentuated in the case of the ape. The expressiveness, the strength and the duration of the ape's emotional manifestations are indeed such that full opportunities are afforded for closely observing all the successive stages in which the respective emotions are being unfolded. Nothing of the like can be observed in the case of the human child, the behaviour-mirroring of whose emotions is incomparably paler and less sharply defined. 
</para>

<para>
Thus, in a state of excitement Joni's hair is seen to bristle up, he arises verticailly erect and emits a modulated <quote>oh-oh'ing</quote> sound; next heclenches the fists of his foot and begins expressively gesticulating with both hands. The only outward expression of excitement with Roody consists in his heavy breathing. 
</para>

<para>
When overpowered by despair or completely woebegone Joni starts a resounding outcry; next he stretches out his hands, then throws them about his head, and lastly falls prone on, the ground, where he finds himself a headhold and commences a number of somersaults. In course of these convolutions the ape's face slightly darkens, but there is no evidence of tears. Mild forms of depression find their expression in protrusion of lips and whining. 
</para>

<para>
If particulary sad, Roody starts to weep, shedding abundant tears, which drop right upon the floor. He blushes, but his vociferation is of course as nothing compared to the wild outcry of Joni. Also, his gesti-culation is by far less sharply pronounced, the most frequent gesture consisting in rubbing his eyes with the fist. Joni's mimics are naturally devoid of this gesture, since he sheds no tears. Roody expresses a very mild form of depression
<footnote><para>
Especially when the stimulus is unexpected.
</para></footnote>
 by turning his upper lip down. 
</para>

<para>Tearless crying, similar to that of the chimpanzee is observed in the human infant only up to the age of 1&half; months. </para>

<para>
While the human infant's joy finds expression in loud laughter accom-panied by other strident and sharp sounds (such manifestations occurring already at the age of 3 or 4 months and becoming always stronger thereafter), the chimpanzee lacks the faculty of emitting vocalized laughter and even when tickled will only pant and broadly grin, though his eyes glitter and all his face expresses full satisfaction. The absence of vocalized laughter in the anthropoid seems to be compensated by the ejaculation of other loud sounds. Thus, the joyful excitation of the ape is first signalled by a kind of bravura of oh-oh-ing outcries, pitched in a major key, and later passes into a resounding bark accompanied at every second by a real whirlwind of diverse bodily movements and gestures. Mention was already made of the fact that the frightened human infant gets pink in the face and cries out, pressing his hands to his chest. Under similar circumstances the chimpanzee becomes pale, his hair bristles up and he emits a short and dull <quote>o-o</quote> sound. When in a tantrum of rage the chimpanzee turns up lip, shows gums, opens mouth and begins banging against the offending object. The human child when angered clenches teeth and fists and starts stamping both feet without moving from his place. 
</para>

<para>
The child expresses his affection by kissing or rubbing his face against that of his friend. The chimpanzee shows his friendship by touching the object of his feelings with the lips of his open mouth (a similar gesture is observed with the child only under 2&half; years) or else by using his tongue in the same way (which is not at all to be observed in the case of the child). 
</para>

<para>
The astonishment of the human child is accompanied by a deep sigh, while the astonished chimpanzee gives out not a single sound. The child's disgust is expressed by a kind of grunting or coughing sound. No vocalization whatever is emitted by the chimpanzee under similar circumstances. 
</para>

<para>
All three emotions — astonishment, fear and excitement — frequently cause the chimpanzee's hair to stand on end (on his face as well as on his body). 
</para>

<para>If moved by curiosity, the chimpanzee will nearly always start smelling the intriguing object, a form of behaviour again never to be observed in the human infant. </para>

<para>
But the intentness of the human child is characterized by a special kind of mimics altogether alien to the ape and consisting in the protrusion of the tongue and in the coordination of movement of arms
<footnote><para>
Thus, the child protrudes his tongue under circumstances similar to these: when handling objects which he is afraid of letting fall down; when carrying too heavy burdens; during his first attempts at donning a cap, etc.
</para></footnote>
.
</para>

<para>
Passing over <emphasis>to the range of emotional stimuli</emphasis> we are again liable to find tremendous differences. Indeed, in considering the three principal emotions — excitement, sadness and joy — we see that the former actually takes the lion's share in the ape's mentality as compared with the latter two, while it is but feebly and rarely manifest in the human child. In direct contrast to Roody, Joni was often found to respond almost tempestuously to environmental changes but his responses somehow seemed to lack colour, or, to put another way, appeared insufficiently differentiated. 
</para>

<para>
As a matter of fact, one got the impression that Joni was at first unable to decide as to whether the new stimulus was favourable or not It was as if he, himself, felt uneasy as to what kind of response might follow: whether it would be joy or sadness and whether the given stimulus dictated self-defence or attack. 
</para>

<para>
A wealth of observations shows the child's reaction to be incomparably more rapid and precise: the human infant <emphasis>either</emphasis> rejoices or grieves, <emphasis>either</emphasis> feels fear or anger, but knows none of these intermediate excited mind states when things have not yet made themselves sufficiently clear and no definite attitude or frame of mind can accordingly be adopted. It appears as if the human child at once grasps the biological purport of every new stimulus and hastens to respond accordingly. 
</para>

<para>
The range of every description of emotions — pleasant, unpleasant, affectionate, astonishment and curiosity — is indeed incomparably broader with the human child. Suffice it to remember the acute sensation of pain as felt by the child crying at even the smallest hurt; or we might remember the tears he sheds in sympathy with his elders and the many other afflictions of the higher order which he is prone to experience, as for instance when thwarted in his creative, constructive or reproductive activities, if disappointed in his ambitions, etc. 
</para>

<para>
None or at best very few of these emotions are shared by the chimpanzee. Of course, the human child is also moved by a much vaster range of pleasure and joy-causing stimuli. So, it is already at a very tender age that his ontogenesis reveals him to possess a special form of perceptive joy — the sense of the comical — which not unfrequently comes into play as soon as the child perceives a new or unexpected combination of well-known stimuli; the availability of the sense of the comical shows us indeed that the child is capable of perceiving any infringement of the norm and, which is more, finds a source of amusement in the element of novelty and even rejoices in it. 
</para>

<para>
The human child is just as much depressed in the case of ill-luck as he is happly upon reaching the desired goal and this again tends to vastly increase the range of his pleasant emotions. 
</para>

<para>
There seems indeed not to be the slightest doubt to the effect that such faculties as curiosity, attention and astonishment are of incomparably wider scope with the child, — a fact which is altogether well borne out by the speech reactions of the human infant. 
</para>

<para>
Our comparative investigation of the emotions peculiar to the two subjects plainly reveals their external expression — with the single exception of affectionate behaviour — to be much more sharply marked with the chimpanzee. We have already had occasion to see how buoyant are his expressions of sorrow, anger, fear, etc. 
</para>

<para>
Our general impression is that with respect to the carricature-like expressiveness of his feelings the chimpanzee bears much likeness to the mentally insane with their extravagant and exaggerated mimics and pantomimics. 
</para>

<para>
As now regards the range of emotions — or the latitude and multipli-city of emotion-causing stimuli — our observations seem to mark out a rather well defined line of cleavage between the two subjects: while the chimpanzee tends to a broader range for such feelings as general excitement, fear and anger, the human infant is affected by a far wider number of such stimuli which are apt to call forth joyful, sad or affecti-onate behaviour-responses. Feelings associated with cognition, such as curiosity, astonishment and attention also come in the same line. 
</para>

<para>
Roody was also much more apt to <emphasis>imitate</emphasis> adult behaviour, and his <emphasis>imitative behaviour</emphasis> was by far more efficient and versatile. While Joni could only imitate separate actions, Roody appeared to be capable of reproducing a whole series of them. The boy liked to impersonate pro-fessional men and tradesmen and would often mimic doctors, automobiledrivers, newspaper-vendors, museum curators, firemen, photographers, fishermen and soldiers. On the whole he was able to hit it off rather successfully. He liked to attire himself in the respective wearing apparel and was propensical in the mimiking of voice, gesture and pitch of tone. 
</para>

<para>
His mimetic behaviour moreover comprised the imitation of grunting, snorting and singing. He even went so far as to attempt the reproduction of certain animal cries like the crowing of birds and the sqeaking of guinea-pigs, or the sounds emitted by inanimate objects, like the ticking of watches; the cracking of curtain-rolls; the roar of airplane-propellers, etc. 
</para>

<para>
The whole mechanism of a child mastering speech may indeed be claimed to be based upon first subconscious and later conscious imitation. When told to reproduce such words as papa, mama, baba (grand mother), nyanya (nurse), Roody (age <cihc_age y="1" m="5" d="22" />) enthusiastically shouts them out, but he is unable to pronounce an unknown word and mixes up the syllables which he puts in the wrong order. However, in some three months, following adult lead, he is fully able to articulate even entirely novel and unfamiliar sound-combinations, though sometimes errs in the successive order of the component syllables. 
</para>

<para>
At the age of 2&half; Roody is already able to reproduce three-word sentences and later remembers even long poetries from picturebooks. It stands to reason that Joni was tremendously behind the boy in this respect — his vocal imitation being confined to mimiking the bark of dogs and the vocalization of his own natural sounds when the same were purposedly uttered by the observer. The little ape seemed to find particular delight in the latter form of imitation. 
</para>

<para>Passing to imitative behaviour connected with the use of implements and constructional play we again see the incontestable superiority of the human child. </para>

<para>
Handling the pencil and the hammer may be taken as good criteria of comparison in this connection. Despite all his efforts, Joni never succeeded in placing a single nail into place, while Roody was able to accomplish this feat already at the age of <cihc_age y="2" m="1" d="10" />. Notwithstanding Joni's constant fidgeting with a pencil, his accomplishments in the field of pencilwork never went beyond tracing several intersecting lines, while Roody (at 2 or 3) could already master some elementary sketches of surrounding objects. Our analysis of the boy's drawings as well as his concomitant pronouncements
<footnote><para>
Thus, when asked what he has drawn, the 2—3 year-old child answers: <quote>airplane</quote>, <quote>uncle</quote>. Sometimes, when drawing he determines the contents of his sketch: <quote>wheel</quote>, <quote>snake</quote>, <quote>horse</quote>.
</para></footnote>
 disclose him to possess a well defined tendency towards identifying his representation with the object drawn
<footnote><para>
At the age of 3 Roody made a sketch of something more or less resembling a human being (see Plate XXIII, fig 5). Having finished his pencilwork he saw he had omitted the hands and exclaimed: <quote>And now where are the hands?</quote> Thereupon he added two lines which apparently stood for the missing members.
</para></footnote>
; his drawings, also reveal his ability to grasp the most characteristic features
<footnote><para>
Once at the age of <cihc_age y="2" m="7" d="29" /> he made in rapid succession two sketches both representing airplanes. On having finished, pointing to the first airplane he said: <quote>This airplane is not like a real one</quote> and pointing to the second: <quote>This airplane is a good one</quote>.
</para></footnote>
. Thus, the child may be seen to compare what he has drawn with the model and to make attempts towards correcting his pencilwork; if unable to do so he supplements his shortcomings by a vocal description — a fact bearing evidence to the free play of imagination. None of these specifically human traits could ever be observed in the case of the chimpanzee. 
</para>

<para>
The next point in hand, is a comparison between the <emphasis>egocentric instincts</emphasis> of the two infants finding their principal expression in the instinct of property. In this connection, the first thing that should be definitely brought to attention is that the chimpanzee has a far more agressive way of protecting and safeguarding what he believes to be his lawful property. He also shows greater dexterity, cunning and skill in acquiring prohibited objects. And all at the same time Joni had not any tendency to utilize his property. Striving as hard as he could to get at the desired object, doing his utmost to become the full master thereof, he would at the same time frequently not even know what to do with his newly gotten acquisition, and, unless it be some practically useful object as a bedding, for instance, he would often let it go and seemingly forget all about it the very next moment he had made the procurement. But once he had caught hold of it, should anybody make an attempt at taking the object away, Joni would all bristle up in defence and generally take such an air as if this were the most precious of his belongings. It sometimes even seemed as if the very process of acquisition and not the object itself were his final goal. As a matter of fact, Joni usually showed complete indifference to most of his possessions; but this only up to the moment when there arose the danger ot losing them. But as soon as Joni's belongings begin to attract someone else's attention he starts a desperate fight in order to retain the object in question. Now, Roody would certainly accumulate belongings with much greater avidity than the ape but he was much more prone to make up his collections in a peaceful and quiet manner. He particularly liked such little trifles as sticks and stones and was of course eager to safeguard them, but never displayed the same passionate fervour in opposing somebody's desire to remove them from his possession. He was liable to differentiate between his and other people's belongings and would never be particularly averse to part with any objects about which he did not care in any particular way. Thus, when asked for some plaything by another child he would not unfrequently give it away, adding: <quote>Well, why, in fact, do I want it?</quote> showing thereby that the object in question was of little if any value to him. At times, he would show especial preference towards some disabled old plaything and seemed altogether loth to part with it, while a new or recently acquired toy would rank but comparatively low in his esteem. 
</para>

<para>
It is but quite natural that Roody should have found for his accessions a much more efficient sphere of utilization than was the case with Joni. Even entirely waste material was <quote>reclaimed</quote> and put to good use in the constructional playful activity of the human child; true, when asked to explain the exact need for this or other small stick or stone, Roody was not always able to give a fully explicit and satisfactory answer; but there always would come a time when it would find itself a suitable place in some newly designed structure, though, again, there were many cases when the child immediately visualized the direct purport of his accession. 
</para>

<para>
The primitive aesthetic feelings and colour preferences of the two infants are found to be at considerable variance. Joni preferred blue plates, Roody chose red ores. Roody had a much greated tendency to-wards self-adornment and definitely enjoyed looking at his own self when attired in some new garb. 
</para>

<para>
It may generally be said that the child draws his inspiration from the world of real objects and carries it into the realm of cognition. Thus, we know him to possess a definite predilection in favour of some pictures and we are aware of his preferring some books to others. The child moreover exercises <emphasis>choice</emphasis> and <emphasis>judgement</emphasis> in his selection of stories. He prefers the phantastic, the humoresque, the dynamical. He understands imagery and in listening to adventure stories is fully able to give free vent to his powers of imagination. 
</para>

<para>
Nothing of the like is observed with the chimpanzee. His mind dwells solely upon the concrete. May be, the only cases when the imagination of the ape does come into the picture is when he is found to play with some part of his own body or when he purposefully erects obstacles to be overcome in course of his playful activities. 
</para>

<para>
<emphasis>The sex instinct</emphasis> was, on the other hand, certainly much more pronounced in Joni. Emotional behaviour was invariably accompanied by sexual irritation which could be particularly often observed in the process of his wrestling with a foot-ball or some other soft object. Roody never displayed even a trace of excitation under similar circumstances. 
</para>

<para>
In summing up our analysis of <emphasis>instinctive behaviour</emphasis>, we find hat nearly all instincts find a much sharper and stronger expression in the ape. This applies to such instincts as self-support; self-protection (both defence and attack); freedom-seeking; ownerrship; social and sexual instincts. There appears to be only a single instinct, namely that of imitation, in which the manifestations of the chimpanzee fall short of those of the human infant. 
</para>

<para>The <emphasis role="bold">least</emphasis> divergence between the two subjects is to be observed in <emphasis>playful activity</emphasis> and especially in mobile games. </para>

<para>
Roody liked games which might be qualified by the term <quote>pseudo-locomotion</quote>. Thus, he would often set up a long train of toy vehicles, fill them with his dolls or toy animals and pretend that he was off on a railway journey, himself taking the active part of the engine-driver. 
</para>

<para>
When in-doors Roody found particular pleasure in pretending that he was skating or skiing: he used to take some kind of plank, place his slippers on top and begin a series of sliding movements making believe that this was nothing but this very winter sport. 
</para>

<para>Nothing even remotely resembling such <quote>pseudo-locomotion games</quote> was ever observed in the case of Joni. </para>

<para>
But, while little-three-year Joni was able to swing about on a door for quite a long stretch of time, Roody could master the feat only at the age of four and, at that, very soon got tired and would be obliged to discontinue the amusement. It goes without saying that every description of gymnastical exercise (such as climbing, hanging down, swinging, jumping, etc.) was performed by Joni with much greater ease and dexterity and involved in his case a much more considerable number of bodily movements, a fact which is of course readily explained by the much greater strength and tenacity of the ape's arms and legs. Roody could remain suspended on the door for no more than 2 to 5 seconds, while Joni could hang on for several minutes at a time. More than that, Joni could remain suspended head downwards for 2 or 3 seconds — a feat which Roody could never achieve. Joni showed no signs of fear when jumping from an altitude of 2 to 3 meters and even higher; the maximum height Roody could negotiate was never in excess of <superscript>1</superscript>/<subscript>4</subscript> of a meter. Joni would boldly climb up steep ladders to the second floor of houses; Roody seemed already afraid when reaching the height of 2 meters, etc. 
</para>

<para>Our analysis of <emphasis>sporting games</emphasis> reveals the following points of divergence. </para>

<para>
The <quote>enthusiastic</quote> disposition of Joni led him to a display of much greater zest in <emphasis>competitive games</emphasis> and he flew into veritable fits of passion whenever <emphasis>wrestling, catching or taking away</emphasis> was concerned. No less passionate behaviour could be observed when be indulged in such sporting pastimes as catching up some rapidly thrown-up object, taking it away from its lawful possessor, stealing away from his cage, or escaping from pursuit. 
</para>

<para>
Upon failing to be the victor of a contest, Joni would never cry, but used to show anger with respect to his partner; Roody, on the other hand, would very frequently start weeping under similar circumstances. Roody's favourite competitive game consisted in running bars and in wrestling, in which play he would always do his utmost to overtake his comrades. 
</para>

<para>
Our observation of playful behaviour <emphasis>with purposefully provided obstacles</emphasis> shows that Joni preferred to burden his mouth and legs (of which he made free use for carrying loads), while Roody carried everything in his hands; while Joni preferred negotiating difficulties connected with overloading himself with various objects (carried in mouthand between legs) and took particular pleasure in such processes as stealing, climbing through holes
<footnote><para>
He seemed to find particular enjoyment in picking-up this or other object and there upon dragging his body through some narrow bottleneck aperture, both head and body often becoming entrapped in the narrow opening.
</para></footnote>
 and the like, Roody found an unending source of merriment in jumping over barriers, walking and riding on bicycle, in toy motor car, etc. What he seemed to like especially was various forms of leg-exercise and he was particularly keen at negotiating various obstacles and risky positions connected with retaining his equilibrium (walking over narrow bridges, beams etc.) 
</para>

<para>
It is interesting to note that Joni, upon hurting himself would stoically endure the pain while Roody always tried to evade pain-causing stimuli and would exercise principally his dexterity and sense of boldness. Thus, the human infant tends towards the mental skill, while the ape strives principally towards bodily skill. 
</para>

<para>Playing at <emphasis>hide-and-seek</emphasis> again shows <emphasis>Joni</emphasis> to find much better places of concealment than <emphasis>Roody</emphasis>. </para>

<para>
In his games with <emphasis>live animals</emphasis>, we see Joni play the despot and try in every describable way to torture, pursue, beat, worry and even kill his inferior playmates; the human infant, on the other hand, does what he can to involve the animal (toy or live) into the sphere of his playful activities and endeavours to set up <emphasis>organized play</emphasis>, in which he reproduces a successive series of relevant and logically consistent events, dealing principally with such phases of adult life as fire, hunting, travel and the like. 
</para>

<para>
The animistic attitude of the child towards his toys as well as his powers of <emphasis>imagination</emphasis> are particularly manifest in his games. In his games Roody would repeatedly attribute his own feelings to some toy — cat, cock, hare or doll and exclaim: <quote>See the cat cry</quote>, <quote>Poor cocky, weeping like anything!</quote> <quote>Rive (the doll) has got something into the wrong throat!</quote>, etc. It is clear that the child does not take his own animistic utterances for the verbal truth. He understands that his doll and toy beasts are <quote>not quite real people</quote> but he nevertheless thinks them to be <quote>like people</quote>. Thus, Roody, once gave his toy wooden horse a book and told it <quote>to read</quote>. In order <quote>to encourage the horse to read</quote> he began himself reading <quote>horse-like</quote> i. e. uttering a series of meaningless and incoherent sylables. On another occasion he made his doll utter nonsensical statements (apparently <quote>doll-like</quote>?). Such facts as these tend to prove that in his games the child never substitutes one form of reality for another, but consciously rises above the sphere of the real to indulge in the free display of phantasy and imagination. We see the child create now mental forms but these forms are neither due to a complete identification o myth and fact nor to a complete oblivion of the real things about him. 
</para>

<para>The child's creative way virtually consists in the remodelling of reality. It would seem that in this instance at least some analogy could be found with the ape. </para>

<para>
But the infant chimpanzee in his struggling with fake enemies and in his purposeful erection of obstacles can be seen to display such extraordinary passion, rage or zest that one gets a quite definite impression to the effect that real objects are either being considered by him as mere puppets which virtually amounts to a blending of the psychic ego with substituted reality, or else it may be that there takes place no mental substitution whatever so that the ape perceives his obstacles in a <quote>matter of fact way</quote> conceiving them as nothing more or less than concrete things as such. 
</para>

<para>
In such of his games as involve the participation of animate and inanimate playmates the human infant frequently takes upon himself the part of leader and protector and, while acting this part, he makes every attempt to appear magnanimous, generous and brave (a quality of which he is somewhat short in every-day life) and exerts every effort to show himself merciful and kind to the alleged lowly and oppressed (being in this respect a complete contrast te the ape). 
</para>

<para>
Passing over to the problem of <emphasis>response to pleasant sound stimuli</emphasis> we find that Roody was eager to find amusement in self-emitted vocalized sounds already at the age of 3 or 4 months (first came incoherent vocalizations, then muttering, shouting and lastly telling verse and singing); Joni never exhibited even the slightest trace of pleasure in the utterance of vocalized sounds; and this despite his strongly marked tendency towards making most various kinds of noise, such as clattering of lips, sonorous pulling of eyelid, banging of hand aainstg various objects, rattling with a stretched piece of rubber, etc. 
</para>

<para>
In playful activity of the <emphasis>experimental kind</emphasis>, such as is associated with the exploration of novel stimuli, like water, fire, sand and various objects with sharply marked characteristics (keen edge, transparency, softness, elasticity) the writer was able to note the following principal divergences. 
</para>

<formalpara>
<title>Roody actually experiments with his environment; </title> and not only does he attempt to gain cognisance of these or other concrete characteristic features, but he also actually tries to come <emphasis>to the very root of things</emphasis>. His interests are primarily directed towards finding a satisfactory account for the appearance and disappearance of properties. Thus, at the age of <cihc_age y="2" m="5" d="27" /> Roody found amusement in extinguishing a candle and on having blown out the flame, wonderingly exclaimed: <quote>Now, where is the fire?</quote> Next, he began looking for the <quote>lost fire</quote>, searching for it under tables, chairs and other articles of furniture
<footnote><para>
It was only upon a single occasion that I was able to observe similar behaviour with Joni. Upon having once rubbed him with turpentine and after the chemical had be gun tickling him I saw the ape start looking about as if in search of the <emphasis>invisible</emphasis> enemy who was causing him the umpleasant sensation. The chimpanzee's curiosity in this instance was however merely stimulated by painful sensations and was in no way aroused by purely cognitive tendencies.
</para></footnote>
.
</formalpara>

<para>
Quite the opposite with Joni. He extinguishes a candle with not a single sign of astonishment or dismay. The disappearance of the flame is taken for granted and no inquisitiveness is aroused.
In the case of Roody, experimenting behaviour was particularly evi-dent when he had occasion to come across a pool or some other body of water. At the age of 2.10.9 the boy was already found to perform actual experiments by way of throwing various articles into a pool in order to see which of them would float and which would not; here are some of his comments: <quote>This little lid floats all right</quote> (eagerly following the drift of a small wooden object); <quote>And what about this one?</quote> (before launching another one); <quote>Why does not iron float? — yes, it sinks</quote> (on putting an iron receptacle into water and seeing it become submerged); <quote>A stone does not float</quote> (on seeing it go to the bottom) <quote>and my bear floats</quote> (the toy in question was made of wood). 
</para>

<para>
At the age of <cihc_age y="2" m="3" d="25" /> Roody was observed to become particularly interested in the tripod of a photographic apparatus. By gradually lessening the distance between the supports, he seemed to be trying to gauge the smallest range at which they could be set without interfering with the equilibrium of the structure. Every time the distance was reduced, Roody would wonderingly say to himself: <quote>Will it go on standing?</quote> At last the tripod tumbled down and the boy made the inference: <quote>Won't stand any longer!</quote>. On another occasion upon being given a small watch he brought it close to his ear and began eagerly listening to its ticking. Then, he began consecutively approaching the watch to his head, pressing it to the eye, etc., as if trying to find out which conditions were more and which less favourable for listening in.	
</para>

<para>The human child gladly reclaims all kind of waste and refuse material and turns it to good account in his games, a trait never to be observed with Joni. </para>

<para>
In playing with hard or sharp objects Joni was incomparably bolder than Roody: thus, the latter, would never dare to attempt taking nails into his mouth, a thing which Joni had been observed to do more than on one occasion. Similarly, Roody never extended his mouth by inserting sticks, as was the wont of Joni, and he confined himself to merely putting twigs in the extended palm of his hand. This again shows how very much afraid of <emphasis>painful sensation</emphasis> the human child is. Speaking about the use of sticks, branches and other elongated objects, it seems worth mentioning that while Joni would at best utilize a stick in the capacity of an auxiliary instrument for reaching to remote objects (e. g. for frightening cockroaches out of their holes, or for getting at a suspended lustre), Roody found sticks and twigs to be highly suitable structural materials and would invent for them no end of useful applications such as making whips, toy airplanes, boats, wells, etc. 
</para>

<para>
<emphasis>Playful behaviour of a destructive nature</emphasis> took a much greater share in Joni's pastimes and was invariably accompanied by far greater gusto, as well as efficiency. Destruction for its own sake seemed indeed to be the source of the ape's greatest pleasure, and his sharp teeth and strong hands would usually make short business of the luckless prey. Roody was manifestly unable to destroy things with anything like the same speed or completeness as were characteristic for Joni. True, he also seemed to find a peculiar pleasure in demolition, but his naturally weaker hands never afforded him the same possibilities in this respect and he often happened to resort to various <quote>tools</quote> for the purpose in question, preference being generally given to stones, sticks and the like. He also never contented himself with demolishing what was nearby, but extended his destructive activities to what was even beyond his direct reach; as compared with the ape, the human child could also much more frequently be seen to throw a stick or a stone at a definite target. Also, he sought to produce the maximum effect by combining <emphasis>destruction with structural activity</emphasis>. Thus, he would make himself bows, wooden forks for shooting, pebbles, toy swords, etc., and found pleasure in firing from toy guns or pistols. Once Roody even made himself a peculiar, kind of projectile resembling a shell with poisonous gases. He put some dust into a jug and started throwing it up and down. The tumbling down of the jug apparently gave him the illusion of an explosion, while the escaping dust was intended to represent a smoke-screen. 
</para>

<para>
It is highly typical that Joni's imitative behaviour should be more effective in <emphasis>destruction</emphasis>, while that of Roody — in <emphasis>construction</emphasis>. Roody took hold of tools or instuments for <emphasis>creating</emphasis> or building <emphasis role="bold">something</emphasis>. He used to build as best he could airplanes, boats, railway-trains, zoological gardens, houses, telephones, wells, cages, etc, the comp-letion of every new structure being invariably greeted with the most exhuberant joy. Cf. also <xref linkend="tabler22" /> (The child independently constructs a kind of airplane). 
</para>

<para>
The child made rapid progress
<footnote><para>
We of course speak of <emphasis>spontaneous</emphasis> improvements gained in free play activity and not of improvements acquired by learning.
</para></footnote>
 in the design and construction of every new item of his structural schemes (cf. the illustrations showing the houses built by Roody at the age of 2, 2&half; and 4<superscript>3</superscript>/<subscript>4</subscript> years respectively). 
</para>

<para>
Contrariwise, Joni succeeded much better in extracting nails instead of tacking them in; tearing a trapeze down from its hook as contrasted with putting it into place; unlocking a padlock as against locking it; un-tying a knot, instead of tying it etc. 
</para>

<para>
At a certain time, both little ones had got nine-pins at their disposal. These nine-pins were of a kind that could be taken into pieces and put together again. While Joni could for quite a long time find pleasure in disassembling the plaything, mutely appealing to me to put the parts to gether every time he had done with disjoining, but only immediately to start the process of dismantling afresh after I had finished, Roody would continuously exercise his ingenuity in both taking the parts asunder and putting them together again, a form of activity which had not even been observed a single time in the case of Joni. 
</para>

<para>
The tendency towards constructive play is very prominent in the human child and in contrast to the ape leaves destructive behaviour far behind. Mention however should here be made of two strange imitatory contrivances which Joni did manage to make on two separate occasions. These were, one, an imitation of a string musical instrument and, the other, a kind of rattle. The two instances in hand were as follows: on one occasion I saw the chimpanzee draw aside a rubber ring which he had previously placed round his head. A clicking sound followed. Evidently finding pleasure in the sound, Joni fastened the ring to his tooth and began playing on it with his fingers as if it were a musical in-strument. Another time he inserted sawdust into a small bottle and started shaking it, evidently awaiting to hear something of a rattling sound. 
</para>

<para>
On reaching his third year, Roody began displaying an even more tem pestuous growth of structural activity. At this stage there could hardly be found any household or other object which he would not be seeking to reproduce in his structures. Of course, seen in the light of actual verisimilitude, the child's buildings cannot be otherwise qualified than as coarse, inadequate and inefficient. But the child takes no heed. He clearly sees what factually ought to be in this or other place, but instead of materializing the item in question he at once leaps into the realm of phantasy. The creative power of his mind brings forth the winged almighty word: <quote>Let it be</quote>, whereupon ships begin to sail, trains to run, airplanes to fly and factories to work. 
</para>

<para>
This most wonderful <emphasis>imagination</emphasis>, this gift of taking the pale and humdrum canvass of reality for weaving on it with weak and unskilled infantile hands a wonderful and manycoloured vista of imaginary events is essentially a human gift and we find but poor and dim hints in this direction on the part of the chimpanzee. 
</para>

<para>
Now, that we are nearing the close of that part of our analysis which deals with <emphasis>playful activity</emphasis> it seems necessary to say that among all the kinds of play in which he indulges, the infant chimpanzee most often chooses amusement of the <emphasis>sporting or gymnastic</emphasis> kind. The ape passionately indulges in such forms of playful activity as are connected wit <emphasis>overcoming obstacles, destruction, killing or worrying</emphasis> smaller animals, but imitation and construction are altogether beyond him, being as it were, the specific prerogatives of the human mind. True, both infants seem to find nearly the same degree of pleasure in playing with <emphasis>sounding</emphasis> or <emphasis>moving</emphasis> objects, but <emphasis>experimental</emphasis> play as such is incomparably more developed with the human child and bears the definite stamp of being one of the leading forms of activity which tend to mold the human intellect. In such forms of play the child, far from being a mere spectator or sheer onlooker, appears in the role of the investigator who makes good use of the experimental method, finds the properties of natural phenomena and more or less successfully attempts at tracing down prime causes. We might even perhaps go as far as to say that the playful activity of the three year child already brings out the very features which will in time permit him to become as man the master and moulder of nature. 
</para>

<para>
The <emphasis>initiative</emphasis> displayed by the human child also gives weight to the argument. As already stated, both infants showed a definite tendency towards imitative behaviour, but the human subject had in this respect much greater daring and attempted to reproduce not only what he actually could, but also what was definitely beyond his as yet weak and inadequate capabilities (c.f. what has been stated elsewhere about Roody's imitation of adults). 
</para>

<para>
The behaviour of the chimpanzee reveals yet another important and characteristic feature: viz. greatscattering of attention. Our observa-tions of his playful activities show indeed an entirely fragmentary psychic pattern made up of separate and disjoined elements. His actions may be said to be <quote>mosaic-like</quote>: they begin with a start, are suddenly discontinued; but only to commence again the next moment without, as it were, any assignable reason. The highly organized play of the human infant offers in this respect a striking contrast to the playful behaviour of the ape. In most cases the play of the human child is found to consist of a consecutive series of entirely relevant and mutually-interconnected actions (cf. his play with dolls and live animals discussed elsewhere). 
</para>

<para>
Both subjects are endowed with natural <emphasis>curiosity</emphasis> but it is only with the human child that curiosity extends to the sphere of cognition and it is only with reference to man that we have the right of saying that <emphasis>curiosity</emphasis> actually passes into <emphasis>inquisitiveness</emphasis>. 
</para>

<para>
We may now pass to a general discussion of the <emphasis>intellect</emphasis> of ape and man (as expressed in inquisitiveness, powers of observation, recognition, identification, generalization, abstraction, comparison, making logical inferences, memory and imagination). But in this respect we must in very first place make the following important reservation. 
</para>

<para>
Should we have taken our starting point in such evidence as is based on direct observation — exclusive of the speech factor — we should have been obliged to solely confine ourselves to the statements made in that part of our work which dealt with the similarities between the two subjects. Considering our subject from this angle we should indeed have been obliged to place the ape and the human child on almost the same footing. 
</para>

<para>
But would such conclusions correspond to the true state of things? Have we the right of leaving out the child's utterences, this so potent a factor which permits us to unearth a whole wealth of data on child psychology? It would indeed be a hidden treasure that we should be passing by. Certainly, it is our duty to dig it out, assess and take proper stock of its contents and only then shall we be in a true position for adequately gauging of the entire personality of this most interesting and exclusive individual — the human child. 
</para>

<para>
Having decided upon the necessity of resorting to the evidence of spoken utterance, let us now consider a number of such traits that bear a title to being called <emphasis>human par excellence</emphasis> since they find no counterpart whatever in the mentality of the ape. 
</para>

<para>
Above all the human child is inquisitive. Already at the age of 2&half; years it is imbued with the desire to <quote>inquire within upon everything</quote> and starts bombarding adults wih neverending questions. Eager to know the name of every new thing, zealous to understand the meaning of every word, hurrying to grasp the import of every picture, Roody would already from the very beginning of his third year constantly inquire: <quote>What is it?</quote> But upon reaching 2&half; years the scope of his questions becomes more extended and, no more content with knowing the mere names of objects, he already puts such questions as these: <quote>Tell me all about...</quote> (bread, potato, grapes); <quote>Where does the zebra live?</quote>; <quote>Where does the giraffe come from?</quote>. <quote>Whys</quote> and <quote>wherefores</quote> are constantly on his lips: <quote>Why have you not got a beard?</quote>; <quote>What are clouds?</quote>; <quote>Where do they go?</quote>; <quote>Can we catch them?</quote>; <quote>Why not?</quote>; <quote>Can we make the little stars come down?</quote>, and so on, and so on, to infinity. Everyone knows that a single answer to a child's <quote>wherefore</quote> often entails a series of consecutive and logically connected further <quote>whys</quote>. The child always wants to come down to the prime cause, and sometimes goes even so far in this respect that adults are actually thwarted in their attempts at explanation. 
</para>

<para>
The child shows <emphasis>keen powers of observation</emphasis>. Once, upon seeing a small line drawn on the floor with an indelible ink pencil, Roody (age <cihc_age y="3" m="0" d="6" />) exclaimed: <quote>How it glistens: Why does it glisten? See, I go off and while I am far it still glistens!</quote> On another occasion (age <cihc_age y="2" m="10" d="9" />) he sees two faces on a small rattler; one seems jovial, the other not, Roody exclaims: <quote>The one laughs and the other one does not!</quote>, etc. 
</para>

<para>
The child easily finds and identifies various objects on pictures. At the age of <cihc_age y="2" m="9" d="16" /> Roody knew the names of 85 different objects represen-ted on the cards of a loto game. All the easier does he identify concrete objects. At <cihc_age y="2" m="6" d="13" /> Roody could already distinguish between 45 different animals represented in his picture-book. 
</para>

<para>
At <cihc_age y="1" m="9" d="18" /> Roody was already able to recognize a whole by its com-ponent parts. Thus, when I sawed some toys into several parts, he told me exactly to what particular toy a given piece belonged. Self-recognition by photograph was first noticed at <cihc_age y="1" m="10" d="20" />. Very soon after, Roody recognized on photos his father, mother, nurse, doll and horse, stating the names of each when called upon to do so. He even recognized the writer by a photograph taken 20 years ago. 
</para>

<para>
Roody possessed a well developed capacity for generalization, making analogies, and assimilation (assimilation by colour, form, size, texture of material — elasticity, transparency, etc.). 
</para>

<para>
Examples of generalized notions: at the age of 1 to 1&half; years Roody called all men <quote>uncle</quote>, all young women — <quote>Gaga</quote> (after the name of the domestic help), all elderly women <quote>granny</quote> and all children <quote>Katia</quote> (after the name of a little girl-friend). 
</para>

<para>
We select from among the many data of our records a few examples especially typical for the child's assimilation powers (The cases in hand are illustrated in <xref linkend="tabler15" />—<xref linkend="tabler20" />). 
</para>

<para>
Assimilation by colour: By analogy with cod-liver oil the child terms a piece of yellow oil-cloth — <quote>oil</quote>.
</para>

<para>
<quote>Ham</quote> — a piece of brick-red india rubber.<?br?>
<emphasis>Assimilationby colour and form: </emphasis><?br?>
<quote>carrot</quote> — an orange nine-pin.<?br?>
<quote>Balance-weight</quote> — a cob of maize.<?br?>
<emphasis>Assimilation by form only: </emphasis><?br?>
<quote>horns</quote> — two cone-like figures.<?br?>
<quote>Moon</quote> — a horseshoe-like piece of marmelade.<?br?>
<quote>Axe</quote> — a bitten out piece of cheese.<?br?>
<quote>House</quote> — a bitten out piece of cake.<?br?>
<emphasis>Assimilation by the property of transparency: </emphasis><?br?>
<quote>Icicle</quote> — a glass funnel; a small bottle, a pipette.<?br?>
<quote>Bubble</quote> — a translucent stone in a ring.<?br?>
<quote>Capsule</quote> — small buttons resembling wafers.<?br?>
<emphasis>Assimilation by the property of elasticity: </emphasis><?br?>
<quote>Rubber</quote> — a long apple-peeling,<?br?>
<quote>Rubber</quote> — a measuring tape.<?br?>
<emphasis>Assimilation by size: </emphasis><?br?>
<quote>Mother</quote> — big nails,<?br?>
<quote>Children</quote> — small nails.<?br?>
</para>

<para>
Roody did not always draw his analogies according to the main charactristic feature. However, very often he did find the basic property and actually <emphasis>abstracted</emphasis> it from all secondary characteristics. 
</para>

<para>
The writer has succeeded in tracing all the ramifications of a very typical case of abstraction, connected with the notion of <quote>airplane</quote> — a stimulus which had apparently made a deep impression on the child's mind. 
</para>

<para>Even before he could speak Roody denoted the airplane by the voca-lization <quote>gh</quote> (after the sound of the propeller). </para>

<para>
Once (age <cihc_age y="1" m="6" d="27" />) while playing with wooden shavings he discovered one whose form apparently reminded him of an airplane. He lifted it up into the air and exclaimed: <quote>gh</quote>.
</para>

<para>
Later, the mental image of an airplane would constantly come back to him whenever he saw anything like two surfaces intersecting one another at more or less right angles. 
</para>

<para>
We produce a number of pictures which graphically illustrate 38 cases when an airplane was analogized with different objects, the exact age to which every analogization refers being given below the respective figure. 
</para>

<para>The child thus found analogy between 38 objects widely differing with respect to texture of material, shape, colour and sixe. (<xref linkend="tabler16" />—<xref linkend="tabler17" />). </para>

<para>
We sometimes had occasion to see that one and the same object (e. g. a bitten-off piece of cheese) would bring out a vast number of different comparisons, linked up with the original stimulus by most various kinds of associations. Here is a brief list covering the association-responses to a piece of cheese made within the age of from 2 to 3: carriage; axe (<cihc_age y="2" m="17" d="9" />); automobile; wood-pecker (<cihc_age y="2" m="8" d="0" />); fish (<cihc_age y="2" m="11" d="24" />) crow (<cihc_age y="2" m="7" d="0" />); airplane, seal (<cihc_age y="1" m="11" d="24" />) rooster (<cihc_age y="2" m="0" d="6" />); Pl. <xref linkend="tabler17" />. Analogies such as these by no means come to the child's mind in a haphazard fashion. Thus, if after his statement to the effect that the piece of cheese reminds him, say, of a crow, he is asked to point to its head or tail, the child immediately demonstrates with his index finger the particular spot which, in his opinion, ought to stand for the respective part. 
</para>

<para>
The tendency of the child towards drawing analogies speaks on behalf of the <emphasis>well developed imagination of the child</emphasis>, a characteristic which appears particularly salient if the analogies connected with the <emphasis>perception of plants</emphasis> be analyzed. 
</para>

<para>Leaves, flowers, fruits, twigs are not only seen as real tangible objects — they also serve as the starting point for a vast number of analogies. (Cf. <xref linkend="tabler19" />, <xref linkend="tabler20" />). </para>

<para>
Below are to be found some analogies belonging to the two and three year old child. 
</para>

<informaltable frame='none'>
<tgroup cols='2' align='left' colsep='1' rowsep='1'>
<colspec colname='c1'/>
<colspec colname='c2'/>
<thead>
<row><entry>Stimulus</entry><entry>Analogy made in response</entry></row>
</thead>
<tbody>
<row><entry>Dry leaf</entry><entry><quote>gh</quote> (airplane)</entry></row>
<row><entry>Bat</entry><entry><quote>airplane</quote></entry></row>
<row><entry>Pine and lime-tree twigs</entry><entry><quote>caterpillar</quote></entry></row>
<row><entry>Bich-twig</entry><entry><quote>seal</quote></entry></row>
<row><entry>Fir-tree bush</entry><entry><quote>looks like a crabfish</quote></entry></row>
<row><entry>Yellow flowers</entry><entry><quote>pestles</quote></entry></row>
<row><entry>Twig</entry><entry><quote>crawfish</quote></entry></row>
<row><entry>Twig</entry><entry><quote>reindeer</quote></entry></row>
</tbody>
</tgroup>
</informaltable>

<para>It seems certain that in course of drawing analogies the child actually compares the stimulus and the respective image in his mind. </para>

<para>
Sometimes the process of establishing comparison is as much as worded and the child finds on his own initiative points of likeness and dissimilarity. He certainly also possesses the necessary faculty for qualitative appreciation. On seeing a rather unlucky family portrait made by an unfelicitous artist he exclaims: (age 3) <quote>Father! mother!</quote>, but straight away adds: <quote>Father not like this, mother not like this, I not like this!</quote> He even volunteered the necessary explanation: <quote>Mother has nasty face, father has nasty face, I have nasty hair, I am very nice really</quote>.
</para>

<para>On examining picture-books Roody (age <cihc_age y="2" m="6" d="7" />) very keenly perceived similarities between the people in the book and his acquaintances. </para>

<para>
Both subjects liked gazing at their <emphasis>mirror image</emphasis>, but it was only Roody (age <cihc_age y="1" m="6" d="0" />) who could identify the reflected image with reality, as for instance on an occasion when he looked back upon seeing the reflection of his grand-mother and then began alternately looking first at herself and then at her image in the glass. 
</para>

<para>
The mirror reactions are generally of considerable interest. On first seeing his image in the glass (age <cihc_age y="1" m="4" d="27" />) Roody (just as Joni) spat into it and began banging against it with his fist. When asked: who is there? seeing author and himself in mirror he replied: <quote>Mother, uncle</quote> (he called all male humans <quote>uncle</quote>). Obviously he failed to recognize himself in this instance. But soon (age <cihc_age y="1" m="9" d="19" />) he manifestly identified himself with the image and gave an altogether different response. On bringing his face quite near the mirror he kissed the image and upon being asked <quote>who's there?</quote> immediately gave his nickname and even added on his own initiative <quote>nice boy</quote>. Joni got used to the mirror after some while and made no more threatening gestures, but he could never be observed to kiss or otherwise proffer endearments to his image and whether or not he actually identified himself wiht the reflection remains yet an altogether moot question. 
</para>

<para>
On another occasion I saw Roody make the following interesting <emphasis>comparison</emphasis>. On seeing three white enamelled nails in his bed — two of which were small and one of a larger size, and on further noticing that one of the smaller nails had a little black spot on it, Roody said: <quote>Mother (the big nail) has no coal (no coal — no black speck); child — coal, other not</quote> (evidently meaning that one of the smaller nails or <quote>children</quote> had a black spot on it while the other one had not). This utterance was made when Roody was at the age of <cihc_age y="2" m="0" d="23" />.
</para>

<para>
At the age of <cihc_age y="2" m="6" d="21" /> he was once being read aloud. The text ran as follows: <quote>Two boys hold a wild hairy cat</quote>. Concomitantly with the reading Roody is shown the respective picture where only one boy can be seen to hold a cat. Roody immediately remarks: <quote>And the other one does not</quote> (meaning — does not hold the cat). 
</para>

<para>
Examining an automobile at close quarters, Roody makes a compari-son with his own toy motor-car at home and says: <quote>Father, it has not got a steering wheel, has it?</quote> Then coming nearer and scrutinizing the -machine he remarks: <quote>Father, what a funny wheel, we've not got such a one at home, they have notches on it, and we have not any</quote>.
</para>

<para>The child has a well developed <emphasis>memory</emphasis>.</para>

<para>
Once (age <cihc_age y="3" m="1" d="13" />) Roody happened to break a porcelain cup on which was represented a boy in a green hat and mauve-coloured trousers with a flower in his hand. He immediately burst into tears. In order to comfort him he was on the very same day given another similar cup differing from the original one only with respect to some minor details (notably a blue hat instead of a green one on the boy's head) Everybody was sure that the boy would <emphasis>notice no difference</emphasis> and he was told that an <emphasis>exactly</emphasis> similar cup had been bought. No sooner had he seen the cup than he exclaimed <quote>Green hat!</quote> I erroneously thought he had either forgotten or mixed up the colours and asked him: <quote>What about the pants?</quote> He answered: <quote>Pants and this (pointing to the flower) are like! (They were the same).</quote> Then I again asked: <quote>What colour is the boy's cap?</quote> And he answered correctly: <quote>Blue</quote>. Manifestly his first remark was connected with remembering the colour of the boy's hat on the broken cup, and he had all the time an altogether clear idea of all the colours in the original representation. 
</para>

<para>
Once, at the age of <cihc_age y="2" m="9" d="20" /> the boy remarked: <quote>A chip of wood is han-ging from the dog's mouth</quote> (it was in fact some hair). Next day on seeing the dog in full order he inquired: <quote>Why has not he got anything in his mouth?</quote>
</para>

<para>
The spontaneously formed <emphasis>conditional reflexes</emphasis> of the child number at least many hundred. Roody left the ape far behind in this respect, especially in sound-auricular reflexes (e. g. his reciting verse and prose from memory). The gesture language of the chimpanzee as compared to that of the human infant is incomparably poorer and again in contrast with that of the child appears to be much more closely connected with the emotional side, whereas in the case of the human child gesticulation essentially reflects the thinking activity of the mind. 
</para>

<para>
The incontestable advantage of possessing the gift of speech goes of course without special mention. It is notably through the faculty of speech that we perceive the child to be the full master of logical thought, permitting him to make inferences, draw conclusions and understand such phenomena as are within the compass of his immediate environment. 
</para>

<para>
On the other hand, it is the very lack of the speech faculty which prevents us from making any definite non-experimental conclusions as to whether the ape really possesses any of the intellectual processes which are so easily revealed in the human child. 
</para>

<para>Hereunder are given several examples illustrating the child's indepen-dent thinking activity. Each example is an utteiance corresponding to a definite mental process. </para>

<formalpara>
<title>Judgment of supposition.</title> On seeing a sleeping man on the boulevard (evidently drunk) Roody (<cihc_age y="3" m="0" d="25" />) inquires: <quote>Why has uncle's head gone down? Perhaps he's got a headache.</quote>
</formalpara>

<formalpara>
<title>Practical generalization:</title> Roody asks: <quote>What is the little duck made of?</quote> (The material was cellulose). Answer: <quote>I do not know.</quote> Roody: <quote>And I do. It's made of eggshell.</quote> (Deduction based on two characteristics: colour and brittleness). 
</formalpara>

<formalpara>
<title>Conscious understanding of speech:</title> After the boy had been ill for a certain time somebody said: <quote>How thin he has grown! Quite worn out!</quote> He retorts: <quote>Am I so worn out? And where are the holes then?</quote>
</formalpara>

<formalpara>
<title>Logical inference:</title> <quote>You must not throw your caloshes about. You'll break them!</quote> Roody: <quote>But what are they made of?</quote> <quote>Rubber.</quote> Roody: <quote>But rubber won't break, will it?</quote>
</formalpara>

<formalpara>
<title>Deduction:</title> Roody: <quote>May I eat egg-shell?</quote> His father: <quote>No, only birds eat it</quote>. Roody (some time later): <quote>Father am I a bird?</quote> His father (having forgotten what he had just said and apprehending no mischief): <quote>Yes, you are my darling little birdy!</quote> Roody: <quote>Well then I am going to eat eggshell</quote>.
</formalpara>

<formalpara>
<title>Attempts at humour.</title> One of the members of the household: <quote>This is no joke</quote>. Roody: <quote>What is a joke?</quote> — <quote>When somebody says something funny on purpose</quote>. The boy starts uttering the meaningless word <quote>bandyuk</quote> (corrupt from Russian: indyuk — turkey-cock). On being asked why he persists repeating the word he laughingly replies: <quote>It's a joke, isn't it?</quote>
</formalpara>

<para>Such and similar utterances give some insight into the as yet but incompletely fathomed psychic processes that are evolved in the depths of the child's mind. </para>

<para>
We might indeed compare the spoken words of the human child to the rays emitted by a genuine diamond, which gathers into its focus diffused light, refracts it and returns to our wondering eye an amazing shower of glistening rays, whose brilliancy permits of judging both of the quality of the stone and of the fineness of its grinding. 
</para>

<para>
Just so a child's speech; its imagery, its colorful play of halftones, its wonderful manysidedness — all this lays bare before us the human mind and permits us to see how beautiful, peerless and above all <emphasis>progressive</emphasis> the human soul is! 
</para>

<para>Quite different is the impression derived from our analysis of the chimpanzee's mentality.</para>

<para>
Continuing our comparison further we might indeed liken the chim-panzee's mind with its dim and groping manifestations not to a genuine diamond with its wonderful play of colours and again not to a natural unpolished gem with all its tremendous potentialities in store, but to the brother or the allotropic form of the translucent, respelndent and flaring diamond — the grey or blackish, prosy and humdrum graphite. 
</para>

<para>
And as soon as we decide to take stock of the spoken utterances of the child we shall be under the obligation of wiping out all the signs ot equality that we were on the verge of putting between the minds of the three or four year old child and the chimpanzee of the same age. The sign of equality has indeed now to be substituted by the <quote>more</quote> or <quote>less</quote> signs definitely pointing in favour of the human child. But even the more sign pointing to the incontestable quantitative superiority of man seems to be so pale, so unexpressive that one feels tempted to exclaim: <quote>No, not only more, but better! Not to be compared! Qualitatively different! Altogether out of comparison!</quote>
</para>

<para>Now we may pass over from analysis to synthesis.</para>

<para>
What after all is the contemporary chimpanzee? Not only is it impos-sible to say that he is <quote>almost human</quote>; we must go even farther and state quite definitely that he is <quote>by no means human</quote>, — and this on the ground of the following evidence. 
</para>

<para>
Similarities between the human child and the infant chimpanzee do exist and can be traced in many spheres, but it is possible to speak about <emphasis>general similarity</emphasis> only when the subjects are <emphasis>casually</emphasis> and <emphasis>superficially observed</emphasis>. Common features are actually to be found in some kinds of playful behaviour (mobile games, experimenting play) in the expression of some emotions, in conation (particularly destructive behaviour), in some conditional reflexes and in a few intellectual processes which the two are found to possess in common (curiosity, recognition, identification), in some sounds of an undifferentiated nature — but so soon as we begin to deepen our analysis and try to see whether we are in a position to insert the sign of equality here and there, we at once behold the sheer impossiblity of doing so and feel ourselves obliged to start putting in inequality marks directed now in favour of the chimpanzee and now in favour of man. On the whole, it is possible to say that the more biologically important are the functions we consider, the greater becomes the prevalence of ape over man. But, on the other hand, the higher aud the more intellectually refined are the psychic features passed in review, the more we feel convinced of the supremacy of <emphasis>homo sapiens</emphasis>. 
</para>

<para>
Our analysis further discloses man to possess many such features which the chimpanzee lacks altogether. Comparative studies obviously become here irrelevant and have to stop short. Into this group — functional biological features — first falls erect walking and carrying loads in hand; further — in the field of instinct — comes the gift of emitting purely human sounds (loud laughter, singing, reproduction of words); in respect of egocentric instincts — the chimpanzee knows not what to do with acquired property, while his social instincts are not sufficiently well developed to provide for organised <emphasis>peaceful</emphasis> intercourse with inferior living beings; in the field of emotions we see the chimpanzee completely lack moral and altruistic feelings as well as the sense of the comical (which is developed beginning from a comparatively early stage in man); in the sphere of playful activity the chimpanzee seldom indulges in creative or constructional games in which man excels; in the realm of the higher activities of the mind — we find in man such faculties as imagination and logically-consistent speech; lastly, our analysis of habit forming shows that it is only the human infant who is capable of perfectly acqiuring practically useful habits. 
</para>

<para>
On the other hand, it is quite remarkable that we should fail to find in the chimpanzee even a single psychic trait which would not at the same time belong to man at this or other stage of his development. 
</para>

<para>
Even such manifestations as would seem to be inherent to the chim-panzee only, as walking on all fours (motor habits); sniffing at food-stuffs or feeling them with the tongue, threatening gestures, biting (in-stincts); the specific mimics of general excitement (emotion); playing with sharp or cutting instruments (play); specific gesture language (conditional reflexes); providing improvised obstacles (conation) — all these varied forms of behaviour find themselves a pretty close counterpart in the manifestations of the human infant. 
</para>

<para>
The only specific trait of the chimpanzee with apparently no analogy whatever in human behaviour is the modulated grunting <quote>oh-oh</quote> sound ending in bark (accompanying general excitation) and perhaps also the howling and rattling sound of anger and vexation. I never heard Roodia give out any sounds of this description, but I am certain that he might have been able to reproduce the latter two, provided he had been given suitable training-time. 
</para>

<para>A peculiar set of conclusions is reached in connection with the fore-going. </para>

<para>
If we plot the principal mental and physical characteristic features of a three to four year old chimpanzee against the consecutive ontogenetic periods of human life we obtain the following analogies: 
</para>

<para>
Judged by his wrinkle-furrowed face, the three or four year old chim-panzee reminds us of a deep old man (of no less than 60—70 years of age). 
</para>

<para>
With respect to the development of running and climbing as well as of the senses (sight, hearing, etc.) both our own and other investigations put the ape on a level even surpassing that of an adult in the full bloom of his vital forces (24—35 years). 
</para>

<para>
The strength of the ape's hands and teeth outstrips that of a well de-veloped youngster (16—18 years.) 
</para>

<para>
The development of the chimpanzee's vitally important instincts (self-help, self-protection, property, social, etc.) surpasses tah of a seven-year old child. 
</para>

<para>
The strength and expressivity of his emotions are comparable to the state of the mentally insane, whose behaviour bears a striking semblance to the restless excitement and pathetic gesticulation of the troubled chimpanzee. 
</para>

<para>
The playful behaviour of the chimpanzee insofar as destructive, mobile and sporting games are concerned, puts him on a par with a human child of the same age, (1&half;—4 years) this being the only point of tangency in our parallel. 
</para>

<para>
At the same time, our analysis of the playful behaviour of the chimpansee as expressed in games involving <emphasis>creative</emphasis> activity and construction does not permit us to place him any higher than at the station of the 1—1&half; year-old-child. 
</para>

<para>
He remains on about the same scale or even goes down still lower (corresponding to a 6 months to 1&half; or 2 years-old-child) when his capabilities towards forming conditional reflexes are considered. 
</para>

<para>
With reference to gesture language and vertically erect walking we cannot put him on any other level but that of a 9 months — 1&half; year-old-child. 
</para>

<para>
In those of his vocalizations in which he shows any resemblance to the sounds emitted by the human child, e. g. coughing, snorting etc. the respective level goes yet further down, reaching from the first day after a human child is born to no more than 2 or 3 months of age. 
</para>

<para>And lastly — no comparison with the child whatever can be drawn with respect to articulate sounds (such as voiced laughter, singing, speech). </para>

<para>
Almost all the 25 sounds that we have on record and which Joni was capable of emitting when moved by various emotional stimuli find themsleves a definite counterpart in Roody's vocalizations. At the same time as early as at the age of 8 months Roody was already capable of reproducing a four-letter word while he freely indulged in spontaneous word-building at the age of one. Upon reaching <cihc_age y="1" m="2" d="20" /> he already started using words for giving things their names, rapidly enriching his vocabulary with everyday thereafter. In so doing he could be seen to display a fervent desire to stock up an ever increasing supply of new words and eagerly claimed to be told the names of surrounding objects. At <cihc_age y="1" m="5" d="10" /> he began the utterance of sentences, first using two words only, but the sentence soon began to grow longer reaching three words at <cihc_age y="1" m="8" d="2" /> and four words at <cihc_age y="1" m="11" d="2" />. Thereafter the child invariably accompanied all his daily activities with unceasing chatter and unrestrainedly poured forth the full contents of his mind, permitting the observer to readily witness all the intricacies of a hitherto concealed psychic mechanism with all its keen powers for observation, identification, abstraction and logical inference. 
</para>

<para>
Now, comes the moment when it seems particularily opportune to stress the fact that the infant chimpanzee though possessed of the rudiments of quite a number of purely human traits, <emphasis>altogether fails toexercise the respective faculties</emphasis>, and will not even do so if apt to gain definite advantages therefrom. 
</para>

<para>
Thus, the chimpanzee is fully capable of making a few steps in a vertically erect posture and he will always stand up erect when trying to find his bearings in open or unknown country, but never had I occasion to see Joni spontaneously exercise the vertical gait. 
</para>

<para>
The chimpanzee frequently wants to carry some object, along but can invent nothing better than drag it with his foot, often loosing the article on the way and always impeding his progress by the clumsily hauled weight. But this embarassment will never prompt him towards the vertical posture
<footnote><para>
Which is physiologically quite possible, since there are several cases on record when anthropoids kept in zoological gardens <emphasis role="bold">did</emphasis> walk aboud fully erect.
</para></footnote>
 or induce him to start carrying loads in his hands. 
</para>

<para>
The infant chimpanzee constantly hears human vocalizations, responds correctly to spoken directions, uses his own natural sounds for expressing his emotions and acquires complex conditional reflexes fot the mimetic expression of his desires. But never once has there been traced any evidence to the effect that the chimpanzee would try to imitate the human voice or to master be it even the most elementary words by means of which he would be able to greatly facilitate intercourse with his master. 
</para>

<para>More than that; the experiments conducted by Professor Yerkes have plainly shown that no amount of training will ever teach the chimpanzee to acquire the command of human speech. </para>

<para>
The chimpanzee is more than keen to start experimenting with various objects, or exploring them; he is also highly eager to acquire possession of this or other coveted article and he is apt to enter upon a most fervent contest respecting his rights of ownership. But no sooner has he received the desired object than he begins destroying it or at best, leaves it to lie idle. 
</para>

<para>
The few scribblings of the chimpanzee held in the possession of the author fail to give be it even the slightest indication towards his progress in drawing or penmanship. It would even seem that the main pleasure derived by the chimpanzee from handling a pencil, chalk or pen consists not so much in the drawing of a certain pattern as in the very act of handling the respective drawing instruments. 
</para>

<para>
When brought into conditions of human environment the chimpanzee completely lacks any desire to learn the perfect use of various household utensils (such as articles of vessel, spoons, forks and the like), though he <emphasis>would</emphasis> actually be able to do so if he only cared. He never gets tired from <emphasis>being waited upon</emphasis>, in which respect he offers particularly striking contrast to the human infant. 
</para>

<para>
Ardently as does the infant chimpanzee cling to other living beings, strong as may be his wish to establish intercourse with them, never will he adopt any other attitude towards an inferior creature but that of persecutor and killer. And all at the same time he might have made if not comrades, then at least playmates of the lower animals. 
</para>

<para>
Thus, to sum up: 1) <emphasis>In the functional biological field:</emphasis> the chimpanzee totally ignores the possibility of walking erect and of freeing his hands for carrying weights, 2) <emphasis>In the sphere of imitation:</emphasis> the chimpanzee is devoid of imitation insofar as human sounds are concerned and generally fails to extend or improve his imitatory behaviour, 3) <emphasis>In respect of emotional altruistic and social behaviour:</emphasis> the chimpanzee fails to understand the advantages of friendly and sympathetic intercourse with creatures standing on a lower biological level than himself, 4) <emphasis>With regard to habit-forming:</emphasis> the chimpanzee does not improve in the motor habits connected with the use of tools and household implements, 5) <emphasis>In the sphere of playful behaviour:</emphasis> he does not indulge in creative constructional play. 
</para>

<para>
It seems difficult to predict how far the chimpanzee <emphasis role="bold">might</emphasis> go by way of acquiring essentially human features, but one thing seems certain, and it is, that the chimpanzee — this strong, sanguinic, strongly-willed and highly active animal — actually fails to possess any <emphasis>inherent tendency towards progressing</emphasis> in the above-outlined directions, his failing being especially plainly marked out in such domains where he is definitely handicapped of thwarted by nature. 
</para>

<para>All the more strong is the contrast with the human child, who boldly dares to overcome his mental and physical deficiencies. </para>

<para>
To illustrate this point yet further, let us remember that the human child with his weak little hands is naturally unprepared for climbing, but he nevertheless does climb. He will tumble down, hurt himself, start crying, but will at last learn to ascend a tree or roof (true, perhaps with less dexterity than the chimpanzee). Years will go by and he will don spiked boots and a mountaineering costume and rise to greater elevations than the chimpanzee had ever dreamt of. The human child lags far behind the ape in running, but after the age of three he jumps onto his skis or skates and leaves the chimpanzee far behind on snow and ice. Later, in some twenty years or so, he will break world records on motor cars and high-speed electric trains. In contrast to the chimpanzee, the child is afraid of jumping from any considerable elevation and cannot leap from tree to tree as the chimpanzee will, but, he is possessed with a frantic desire to fly; so at the age, of three he runs about the room with outstretched arms crying: <quote>Let's fly!</quote>. Within soon he will board airplanes and conquer the air in high-altitude flying machines and dirigibles. 
</para>

<para>
And so in everything: the weak jaws of the child are seconded by the use of tools, as when he rapidly breaks with a stone the same kernel at which the ape had been gnawing with his teeth, or, when he has resort to axe, vise or hammer instead of using his arms and hands as would be the wont of the chimpanzee under similar circumstances. And then it comes out that the very weakness of man is the source of his strength. Man's power breaks forth from the very fact of his overcoming natural impediments and obstacles. 
</para>

<para>
It may even be — that none other but this very process of overmastering physical shortcomings had once been responsible for making of man's primordial ancestor what he has now grown to be — the genus <emphasis>Homo sapiens</emphasis>. 
</para>

<para>
Thus, it was the natural weakness of the human body — notably the weakness of teeth and arms — which prompted primeval man to toil, take a tool in hand and become technician and inventor. 
</para>

<para>
The poorly developed vital egocentric instincts of man (such as self-support and self-protection) had to be compensated by a strengthening of the social and altruistic behaviour, which later took the form of organised intercourse. 
</para>

<para>
Great emotional vulnerability — the wide range and considerable acuteness of painful sensations — led on the one hand to the develop-ment of the feeling of compassion — bordering upon moral and altruistic feelings, and on the other hand brought about a specific form of pleasant mind-state — the sense of the comical — which may have sprung up as a kind of antidote to the feeling of dejectedness. 
</para>

<para>
The insufficient expressivity of man's mimics may have stimulated the wider use of the vocal organs resulting in numerous and varied vocalizations. 
</para>

<para>
At the same time the existence of organized intercourse was persistently claiming for more differentiated forms of mutual understanding than stereotyped mimics and thus it happened that articulate speech came into being. 
</para>

<para>
It may be that the remote ancestor of man, placed as he was in hostile or barren environment, had constantly to gain greater skill in his struggle for existence and, in order to get possession of the necessaries of life, was under the obligation of enduring the fiercest struggle ultimately resulting in the conquest and subjugation of nature. But his conquest of nature involved creative effort and creative effort is intrinsically bound up with <emphasis>imagining that which is not yet there</emphasis>, but has to be either; obtained, or in some way devised. And so it was that the lack of the needed or the difficulty of procuring it led to a vision of the <emphasis>things that ought to be</emphasis>, thus giving rise to phantasy and eventually to its shadow — art. 
</para>

<para>
Such appear to be the main prerequisites for a genesis of the seven specifically human attributes: labour, inventive faculty, organized inter-course, moral feeling, sense of humour, speech and art. 
</para>

<para>
<quote>Forward and upward!</quote> — such seems to be the subconscious motto of man long ere he recognized the thinking being in himself. It appears as if man in course of evolution was constantly adding seven or more talents to the one or two nature had at the beginning shared out to him... 
</para>

<para>
And quite on the contrary — the child chimpanzee — at any rate inasmuch as we know him — does not seem to be in any way inclined to augment his talents; one even gets the impression that the ape has buried the one talent he had once received. 
</para>

<para>
All this brings us to understanding the chimpanzee as a creature obdurate in its limitations, <emphasis>regressive</emphasis> as compared with man and unable or unwilling to go any further in its development. 
</para>

<para>
<quote>Was ein Haeckchen werden will krummt sich bei Zeiten</quote> — A hook becomes bent beforehand — and if the infant-chimpanzee fails to progress as compared with man even at the most tender and easily yielding age, there are but few chances that he should be able to go much further in thereafter years, when his whole mentality is apt to have become finally moulded. 
</para>

<para>
And now, as I come to the end of my comparative study it seems as if the bridge by means of which I had all the time been endeavouring to span the gulf between ape and man was all gone to pieces... 
</para>

<para>
Day in day out, with infinite care and patience, steadily checking up the strength of each structural member did I construct this bridge. All the time it seemed to me that I was nearing the completion of a stupendous structure which was to link up the hitherto disjoined — and all of a sudden what came, but complete collapse! 
</para>

<para>
I thought that I might take my two little ones each from his own side and bring them to the middle of the bridge so that after their long and arduous journey they might here at last shake hands. 
</para>

<para>But what did I find?</para>

<para>
If in the beginning of my task (in the morphological and biological part) my bridge had but few gaps, which might easily have been ignored and against which my two subjects but occasionally stumbled — a yawning abyss opened itself in the culminating point of the structure when I came to its end. The crown of the bridge, the meeting point of intellect and piogress, nay, the very spot from where the chasm seemed the most bottomless and terrifying — that very spot indeed — suddenly collapsed and into it, head foremost, full speed ahead, down went the chimpanzee, leaving his human age-mate high, high above, bewildered, perplexed and as if asking where was now the one to whom he was just a second before quite ready to fraternally extend his outstretched hand. 
</para>

<para>
Shall I ever be able to bring up the chimpanzee to the human level and may be with new experimental conditions find in him such humanlike features which the primeval Proantropos was bound to possess in order to become in time Homo sapiens? The answer to this I hope to find in the third part of my experimental research work: <emphasis>Ability of the chimpanzee to distinguish form, size, quantity, and number, and his capability towards ascertaining likeness and dissimilarity, making analysis and synthesis.</emphasis>
</para>

<para>
Only, then after having made a complete and exhaustive comparison between the mentalities of the child and the ape, shall we be able to delve into the problem of geneology and finally find out in how far the two are real congeners. 
</para>
